Project Gutenberg's Creation Myths of Primitive America, by Jeremiah Curtin

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Creation Myths of Primitive America
       In relation to the Religious History and Mental Development of Mankind

Author: Jeremiah Curtin

Release Date: March 11, 2012 [EBook #39106]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CREATION MYTHS OF PRIMITIVE ***




Produced by Suzanne Shell, Sam W. and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)







Transcriber's Note

Most accented letters in this book are used to indicate pronunciation.
They are usually used in the introductory matter at the beginning of
each story, but not in the stories themselves.

The notes at the end include lists of place names, some of which include
characters with a breve (e.g. ă, ĕ, ĭ, ŏ, ŭ, Ĕ) or with breve and acute
accent (e.g. ĕ́, ĭ́, ŭ́). If these characters do not display properly, you
may wish to adjust your font settings.

Bold text is indicated with equals signs, =like this=.




                CREATION MYTHS
                      OF
               PRIMITIVE AMERICA

                IN RELATION TO

       _The Religious History and Mental
            Development of Mankind_

                      BY

                JEREMIAH CURTIN

  Author of "Myths and Folk-Lore of Ireland,"
    "Myths and Folk-Tales of the Russians,
         Western Slavs, and Magyars,"
         "Hero-Tales of Ireland," etc.


                 [Decoration]


                    BOSTON
          LITTLE, BROWN, AND COMPANY
                     1898




               _Copyright, 1898_
              By Jeremiah Curtin

             _All rights reserved_

               University Press
   John Wilson and Son, Cambridge, U. S. A.




    CURTIN'S WORKS
    ON
    FOLK-LORE AND MYTHS.

    Myths and Folk-Lore of Ireland.
    Hero-Tales of Ireland.
    Irish Fairy Tales.
    Myths and Folk-Tales of the Russians, Western Slavs,
        and Magyars.
    Creation Myths of Primitive America.




  [Illustration: _Jeremiah Curtin in the Ruins of Palenque,
      Central America._]




DEDICATION

[Decoration]

_To_

MAJOR J. W. POWELL,

_Director of the Bureau of Ethnology, Smithsonian Institution, LL.D.
of Harvard and Heidelberg:_


Sir,--You lost your right hand in fighting to save American unity; but
though the hand went from you its cunning remained, with the power to
plan and to execute.

The same kind of impulse that sent you to the field of battle to serve
the country and the world, sent you to the field of science to serve
as a geologist and an explorer in the majestic region of the Colorado,
and finally brought you to found the Bureau of Ethnology. Through your
labors, combined with those of the men whom you have associated with
you, the world has learned more of the great primitive race of our
country than it learned from the discovery of the continent till the
day when the Bureau was founded.

I beg to inscribe this book to you as a mark of my respect and
friendship.

                                            JEREMIAH CURTIN.

       Steamer "Germanic,"
    on the Mid-Atlantic Ocean,
       _October 21, 1898_.




CONTENTS

[Decoration]


                                                        Page
    Introduction                                          xi

    Olelbis                                                3

    Olelbis and Mem Loimis                                51

    Norwan                                                69

    Tulchuherris                                         121

    Sedit and the Two Brothers Hus                       163

    Hawt                                                 177

    Norwanchakus and Keriha                              211

    Kele and Sedit                                       243

    Kol Tibichi                                          267

    The Winning of Halai Auna at the House of Tuina      281

    The Hakas and the Tennas                             297

    Ilhataina                                            313

    Hitchinna                                            325

    Tirukala                                             339

    Sukonia's Wives and the Ichpul Sisters               353

    The Finding of Fire                                  365

    Haka Kaina                                           373

    Titindi Maupa and Paiowa, the Youngest Daughter
      of Wakara                                          389

    The Two Sisters, Haka Lasi and Tsore Jowa            407

    The Dream of Juiwaiyu and his Journey to
      Damhauja's Country                                 425

    The Flight of Tsanunewa and Defeat of Hehku          445

    The First Battle in the World and the Making
      of the Yana                                        467

    Notes, and Names of Places                           485




INTRODUCTION

[Decoration]


The creation myths of America form a complete system; they give a
detailed and circumstantial account of the origin of this world and of
all things and creatures contained in it. In the course of the various
narratives which compose this myth system an earlier world is
described to us, with an order of existence and a method of conduct on
which the life of primitive man in America was patterned.

That earlier world had two periods of duration,--one of complete and
perfect harmony; another of violence, collision, and conflict. The
result and outcome of the second period was the creation of all that
is animated on earth except man. Man, in the American scheme of
creation, stands apart and separate; he is quite alone, peculiar, and
special. Above all, he belongs to this continent. The white man was
unknown to American myth-makers, as were also men of every other race
and of every region outside of the Western Hemisphere.

Described briefly and by an Indian, the American myth system is as
follows: "There was a world before this one in which we are living at
present; that was the world of the first people, who were different
from us altogether. Those people were very numerous, so numerous that
if a count could be made of all the stars in the sky, all the feathers
on birds, all the hairs and fur on animals, all the hairs of our own
heads, they would not be so numerous as the first people."

These people lived very long in peace, in concord, in harmony, in
happiness. No man knows, no man can tell, how long they lived in that
way. At last the minds of all except a very small number were changed;
they fell into conflict,--one offended another consciously or
unconsciously, one injured another with or without intention, one
wanted some special thing, another wanted that very thing also.
Conflict set in, and because of this came a time of activity and
struggle, to which there was no end or stop till the great majority of
the first people--that is, all except a small number--were turned into
the various kinds of living creatures that are on earth now or have
ever been on earth, except man,--that is, all kinds of beasts, birds,
reptiles, fish, worms, and insects, as well as trees, plants, grasses,
rocks, and some mountains; they were turned into everything that we
see on the earth or in the sky.

That small number of the former people who did not quarrel, those
great first people of the old time who remained of one mind and
harmonious, "left the earth, sailed away westward, passed that line
where the sky comes down to the earth and touches it, sailed to places
beyond; stayed there or withdrew to upper regions and lived in them
happily, lived in agreement, live so to-day, and will live in the
same way hereafter."

The American system, as we see, begins with an unknown great,
indefinite number of uncreated beings,--in other words, of
self-existent personages or divinities. Those divinities were
everything at first; there was nothing except them, nothing aside from
them, nothing beyond them. They existed unchanged through untold
periods, or rather through a duration which would be periods were
there a measure by which to divide it. They lived side by side in
perfect concord, in the repose of a primeval chaos of quiescent mind
which presents a most remarkable analogy with the attenuated,
quiescent, undifferentiated matter which, according to the nebular
hypothesis, filled all points of space in the physical universe before
the first impulse of motion was given to it.

At last this long period is ended, there is mental difference among
most of the first people, character is evolved and has become evident;
rivalries, collisions, and conflicts begin.

The American creation myths, as far as we know them, form simply a
series of accounts of the conflicts, happenings, and various methods
by which the first world was changed into the world now existing. This
change was effected in various ways. In the myths of certain tribes or
nations, it is mainly by struggles between hostile personages. One god
of great power and character overcomes a vast number of opponents, and
changes each into some beast, bird, plant, or insect; but always the
resultant beast or other creature corresponds in some power of mind or
in some leading quality of character with the god from whose position
it has fallen. In certain single cases opponents are closely matched,
they are nearly equal in combat; the struggle between them is long,
uncertain, and difficult. At last, when one side is triumphant, the
victor says, "Hereafter you will be nothing but a ----"; and he tells
what the vanquished is to be. But at this point the vanquished turns
on the victor and sends his retort like a Parthian arrow, "You will be
nothing but a ----"; and he declares what his enemy is to be. The
metamorphosis takes place immediately on both sides, and each departs
in the form which the enemy seemed to impose, but which really
belonged to him.

There are cases in which the hero transforms numerous and mighty
enemies indirectly through a special wish which he possesses. For
example, a certain myth hero brings it about that a large company of
the first people are invited to a feast, and while all are eating with
great relish he slips out unnoted, walks around the house, and utters,
as he goes, the magic formula: "I wish the walls of this house to be
flint, the roof also." Next moment the whole house is flint-walled,
the roof is flint also. After that he says, "I wish this house to be
red-hot." It is red-hot immediately. His enemies inside are in a
dreadful predicament; they rush about wildly, they roar, they look for
an opening; there is none, they see no escape, they find no issue.
Their heads burst from heat. Out of one head springs an owl, and flies
away through the smoke-hole; out of another a buzzard, which escapes
through the same place; out of the third comes a hawk, which follows
the other two; out of a fourth some other bird. Thus the action
continues till every head in the flint house bursts open and lets out
its occupant. All fly away, and thus the whole company is
metamorphosed. Each turns into that which his qualities called for,
which his nature demanded; he becomes outwardly and visibly that which
before he had been internally and in secret.

The hero in the above case could not wish his opponents metamorphosed
directly, he could not wish this whenever he pleased or wherever he
met the great company; he had to induce them to enter the house, which
he turned by his wish into flint and then heated. When the moment of
terrible anguish came on them, the true nature of each of those people
grew evident; each head burst open, and out sprang the real person.

All those of the first people whose minds had been modified, who, so
to speak, had grown specialized internally, who were different from
that which they had been to start with, were forced to change also
externally, and could not escape or avoid that great power whose
shadow was approaching; their destiny was on them, and they felt it.

In the Wintu system, one of the two which are set forth in this
volume, nearly all changes were effected by Olelbis; but there are
examples of agents with other means. Tulchuherris turns old Tichelis
into a ground-squirrel at the climax of his perfidy. He changes Hawt,
the porter at the dangerous river, into a lamprey eel, whose children
are to be eaten by Indians in the future. Old Sas, the false and vain
chief in Saskewil, is beaten by his son-in-law, and receives his
present form of sun and moon at the end of a long and bitter struggle,
in which strength, wit, and keenness use the very last of their
resources.

There are cases in which some of the first people are so modified
mentally that they are conscious of what has happened within them.
They are ready for the change, they are willing to undergo it; but
there is no immediate occasion, no impending struggle in which an
opponent could have the chance to transform them. These people
transform themselves by the utterance of a wish, and produce their own
metamorphoses. There are still others who know, as do all, that a new
race is coming, that they will be changed when it comes unless they
are changed some time earlier. They know that they must be changed as
soon as they see the new people or a sign or a mark of their coming.
These unchanged first people, few in number comparatively, attempt to
escape; but their attempts are vain, their efforts are useless. In the
distant east they see smoke from the fires of the advancing new
people, the Indians of America, or hear the barking of the dogs of
this people, and that instant they receive the forms which are due
them. Others escape for a season and hide in dark places; but the
Indians go everywhere, and the metamorphoses continue till the career
of the first people is ended.

I have in mind at this moment a representative picture of this last
group of persons who were unwilling to be metamorphosed and strove to
avoid the new race, the inevitable Indians. They had no desire to see
men, and they fled to all sorts of lonely retreats and remote forest
places. At a certain point on the Klamath is a rough mountain slope
which rises abruptly from the water; far up, well toward the ridge,
about seven-eighths of the way from the river to the summit, is a
bulky high stone which seen from a distance looks much like a statue.
Close behind is another stone, somewhat smaller, which leans forward
in the posture of a person hastening eagerly. Both are white and
shining; they have the appearance of quartz rock. These were two
sisters hastening, rushing away to escape the coming change. When they
reached the points where they are standing at present, the foremost
sister looked toward the east and saw smoke; the second did not look,
but she heard the distant barking of dogs which came from the place
where the smoke was; both were changed into stone that same instant.

With the transformation of the last of the first people or divinities,
which was finished only when the Indians or some sign of them appeared
in every remote nook and corner in which a remnant of the first people
had taken refuge, the present order of things is established
completely. There are now in the world individualities of three
distinct sets and orders. First, that small number of the first people
whose minds had never changed, those gods who withdrew and who live in
their original integrity and harmony, who retired to places outside
the sky or above it; second, the great majority of the gods, who have
become everything in the present world save and except only Indians.
This cycle finished, there is a new point of departure, and we meet a
second group of myths concerning the existent world as it is now with
its happenings,--myths containing accounts of conflicts which are ever
recurrent, which began before all the first people were metamorphosed,
conflicts which are going on at present and which will go on forever;
struggles between light and darkness, heat and cold, summer and
winter, struggles between winds which blow in opposite directions,--in
fact, accounts of various phenomena and processes which attract the
attention of savage men more than others because savage men are living
face to face with them always.

This second group contains a large number of myths, many of them
exceedingly beautiful and, so far as they are known, highly pleasing
to cultivated people. Unfortunately few of these myths have been given
to the world yet, for the sole and simple reason that comparatively
few have been collected from the Indians.

The first cycle of myths--that is, those which refer to creation, in
other words to the metamorphoses of the first people or gods into
everything which is in the world, including the world itself--is
succeeded by another in which are described the various changes,
phenomena, and processes observed throughout nature.

In this second cycle, as I have just stated, light and darkness, heat
and cold, opposing winds, heavenly bodies appear as heroes and leading
actors. For ages the reverence, sympathy, and enthusiasm of primitive
men have been given to those heroes, and are given to them yet, by
every tribe which preserves its ancient beliefs and ideas.

In this cycle is one small group of myths which to the Indian is very
sacred, a group which in many tribes is revered beyond others. This
group associates the earth with the sky and sun considered as one
person, or the sky and sun considered as distinct from each other. To
these are added one, and sometimes two personages born of the earth.
In the simplest version of this myth the earth maiden through being
looked at by the sun becomes a mother, gives birth to a great hero,
the chief benefactor of Indians. This hero gives the race all gifts
that support existence, and it is through him that men live and
prosper. Under whatever name he appears this benefactor is really that
warm light which we see quivering, waving, and dancing above the earth
in fine weather. He is the son of the virgin earth, of that mother who
has never known a consort save the one who looked from the height of
heaven on her.

The lives of the first people are described in creation myths, and
presented as models upon which faithful Indians are to fashion their
lives at all times and places. All institutions of primitive man in
America were patterned upon those of "the first people." Every act of
an Indian in peace or in war, as an individual or as a member of a
tribe, had its only sanction in the world of the first people, the
American divinities.

There was not on this continent one institution, observance, right, or
custom which was not god-given, theoretically. The Indians of America
always acted in a prescribed manner on a given occasion, because the
gods of the world which preceded this had acted in the same manner in
similar conditions and circumstances.

No people could be more religious than those of this continent, for
there was no act of any kind in life during which they were free of
religious direction. The source of this religion is in the myths, and
in the explanations concerning them given by wise men,--in other
words, by sorcerers.

What shall we say of this Indian system, and what is its value?

The first to be said is that it is complete, and for every Indian
believer well-founded and symmetrically developed. In the primitive
religion of America there is no speculation, all is simple statement;
there are no abstractions, qualities are always connected with
persons.

Indians believe that the whole immense body of myths was delivered to
them by the first people in one place or another. Among the Iroquois
there is a detailed account of how myths were told to an ancient chief
and an assembly of the people on a circular open space in a deep
forest. On this space was a large wheel-shaped stone. From beneath
this stone came a voice which told the tale of the former world, told
how the first people had become what they are at present.

Day after day the chief and the people came to the stone, sat, and
listened till the whole cycle of tales was narrated.

On the Lower Klamath is a very old, immense tree, which has given an
account of the first world and people. This tree itself is one of the
first people metamorphosed; no one knows what its age is. Sorcerers go
to it yearly, hold converse, put questions, receive answers. Each year
a small stone is added to a pile in which there are thousands of
pebbles, apparently. This pile stands near the tree; no one is
permitted to count the stones in it. The pile is sacred; once a stone
is placed with the others, it must stay there forever.

This sacred tree has told tales of the first world,--the tales known
to Weitspekan Indians and revered by them.

On the Upper Columbia is a great rock which resembles an elk somewhat.
This rock is also an oracle, one of the first people; like the round
stone of the Iroquois, it has told of the first world, and its tales
all belong to the Shahaptians.

The Indian system has its plain and clear revelation; for believers
it has tangible and undoubted connection with the world which preceded
the present one. Its narratives explain how in one place and another
the first people revealed the tale of the world's transformation.

For the Indian this is all-satisfactory. He has a system which is
perfect, extensive, rich in details, full of interest,--a system which
gives proofs of its origin through testimony delivered by divinities.
It was revealed to the wise men, the worthies, the patriarchs of his
race. What more could he wish for? What more could he ask? Nothing.
The wisdom of his nation is more valid, more reliable than the witness
of his own senses. His eyes and ears might be deceived by tricksters,
but not by the truth delivered to great men among his own people,
preserved by them sacredly and passed down to others.

This is the position of the Indian. He believes in his own system
fully. How are we to relate ourselves to that system and its contents?
What should we think of it? How was it conceived, how developed?

We do not believe in an Indian first world nor a previous people
turned into animals, plants, insects, birds, fish, and reptiles. We
have no ancestors who founded that system; we possess no traditions
that came from it, no beliefs that are based on its teachings, no
faith in its sorcerers, no dread of their workings. Any statement as
to how the Indian system was conceived and how it was developed is
very different in character from a statement of what the Indian system
is externally and on the basis of its own story.

In presenting the system from the purely formal side we are dealing
with simple facts, which we collect and range in order. Once we
possess these ordered facts, we have the externals of everything
Indian,--not only religion, but medicine, politics, social life. We
might stop there and say, This is the system. But from our point of
view we are forced to go further, we must seek explanations. We form
no part of the Indian assembly of believers, we have no faith in their
system except to show us what the Indian mind is; hence we are forced
to ask how the Indian founded his religion and evolved it, we are
forced to look for its origin and meaning. We give no credence to his
tale of revelation; we are certain that he himself--that is, his
race--began the system, that it was developed from insignificant
beginnings, and increased through lengthy periods till it reached its
present form and fulness. We have not the details of how he acted, but
we know where the myth-maker had to begin, and we see what he has
effected.

The physical universe was for myth-makers of the old time in America
the same in principle that it is for us to-day, the visible result and
expression of unseen power and qualities. The difference between us
and them is determined by the things that we see and the way in which
we apprehend them.

What did the ancient myth-makers say of this universe, and what
interest or value has their statement for us at this moment?

The primitive men of America saw before them forests, plains, deserts,
mountains, lakes, and rivers of various sizes, from the smallest to
the greatest; they lived in climates varying from the coldest and most
inclement to the hottest and most difficult of endurance. They saw
around them on all sides a world far more hostile than friendly,--a
world of savage beasts, wild creatures, poisonous reptiles, deadly
insects. Each creature, every plant had its own fixed and settled
character, its own aim and object. Whence came beasts good for food or
clothing; whence others dangerous to life, beasts to be slain or
avoided? Whence came trees and plants of various kinds and uses?
Whence came sweetness in the maple or bitterness and poison in another
tree? What is the origin of corn, and why do poisons grow to kill as
corn does to nourish? Whence came the rattlesnake, and whence the
salmon? Because of these questions myths appeared, and those myths
gave answers which received full faith and credence,--answers on which
was built a theory of how this world arose, and what the true and
proper scheme of life was.

The myth-maker looked at the universe around him, and saw throughout
every part of it individualities having qualities, desires, and
passions in varying degrees. He observed these individualities, and
gave a detailed account and history of how this world arose. He gave
this history by projecting existence into a past which was remote and
passionless. Out of that harmonious past he evolved the present world
and its order by describing in the past world the play of all those
passions, desires, and appetites which he saw at work in life around
him. Such was the method employed in producing the American creation
myths. The task required much time, long observation, careful thought,
and no small constructive power. These creation myths with the next,
which I have mentioned already and called action myths, are the great
result of mental toil and effort in the old time on this continent. In
these two sets of myths the Indian has told what he thinks of the
universe.

When Europeans came to this hemisphere, the American myth system was
unbroken and perfect. There was no second order of thought here. The
continent was untouched by foreign conquest or ideas. The inhabitants
had lived in mental isolation, in absolute freedom from every outside
influence. Human history has no second example of a single system of
thought developed over such a vast area. Inhabited America extended at
least nine thousand miles from north to south, more than one third of
the earth's circumference and considerably more than the earth's
diameter. This territory where broadest was at least three thousand
miles from east to west, both in North and South America. Over this
immense portion of the earth's surface with its endless variety of
soil, climate, scenery, and conditions of existence, a single system
of primitive philosophy was developed with a fulness and a wealth of
illustration which could find no parallel in any other place. The
result of all this is that we have in America a monument of thought
which is absolutely unequalled, altogether unique in human experience.
The special value of this thought lies, moreover, in the fact that it
is primitive, that it is the thought of ages long anterior to those
which we find recorded on the eastern hemisphere, either in sacred
books, histories, or literature, whether preserved on baked brick,
burnt cylinders, or papyrus.

The American system, which gives us a circumstantial account of the
beginning of all things, is as far reaching as the nebular hypothesis,
or as that theory which gives a common origin to man and all sentient
existences.

Primitive man in America stood at every step face to face with
divinity as he knew or understood it. He could never escape from the
presence of those powers which had constituted the first world, and
which composed all that there was in the present one. Man's chief
means of sustenance in most parts were on land or in the water. Game
and fish of all sorts were under direct divine supervision. Invisible
powers might send forth game or withdraw it very quickly. With fish
the case was similar. Connected with fishing and hunting was an
elaborate ceremonial, a variety of observances and prohibitions. Every
man had a great many things to observe as an individual, a great many
also as a member of his tribe or society.

The most important question of all in Indian life was communication
with divinity, intercourse with the spirits of divine personages. No
man could communicate with these unless the man to whom they chose to
manifest themselves. There were certain things which a man had to do
to obtain communication with divinity and receive a promise of
assistance; but it was only the elect, the right person, the fit one,
who obtained the desired favor. For instance, twenty men might go to
the mountain place, and observe every rule carefully, but only one man
be favored with a vision, only one become a seer. Twenty others might
go to the mountain place, and not one be accounted worthy to behold a
spirit; a third twenty might go, and two or three of them be chosen.
No man could tell beforehand what success or failure might await him.
The general method at present is the following, the same as in the old
time:--

Soon after puberty, and in every case before marriage or acquaintance
with woman, the youth or young man who hopes to become a doctor goes
to a sacred mountain pond or spring, where he drinks water and bathes.
After he has bathed and dressed, he speaks to the spirits, he prays
them to come to him, to give him knowledge, to grant their assistance.
The young man takes no food, no nourishment of any sort, fasts, as he
is able, seven days and nights, sometimes longer. All this time he is
allowed no drink except water. He sleeps as little as possible. If
spirits come to him, he has visions, he receives power and favor. A
number of spirits may visit a man one after another, and promise him
aid and co-operation. The eagle spirit may come, the spirit of the elk
or the salmon,--any spirit that likes the man. The spirit says in
substance, "Whenever you call my name I will come, I will give my
power to assist you." After one spirit has gone, another may appear,
and another. A man is not free to refuse the offers of spirits, he
must receive all those who come to him. As there are peculiar
observances connected with each spirit, the doctor who is assisted by
many is hampered much in his method of living. There are spirits which
do not like buckskin; the man to whom they come must never wear
buckskin. If a man eats food repugnant to his spirit, the spirit will
kill him. As each spirit has its favorite food, and there are other
kinds which to it are distasteful, we can understand easily that the
doctor who has ten spirits or twenty (and there are some who have
thirty) to aid him is limited in his manner of living. Greatness has
its price at all times, power must be paid for in every place. Those
for whom the spirits have no regard, and they are the majority, return
home without visions or hope of assistance; the spirits are able to
look through all persons directly, and straightway they see what a man
is. They find most people unsuited to their purposes, unfit to be
assisted.

This preparation to become seers or sorcerers among Indians is of
very deep interest. I have given a considerable number of details on
the subject in notes to "Kol Tibichi." The spirit of any plant, any
star, or other personage in creation may become a man's attendant. In
our popular phraseology, this is called his "medicine."

In a Modoc myth the morning star is the attendant of the sun.
According to this myth the sun is destroyed every day physically, is
consumed into a heap of ashes; but as the sun has an immortal golden
disk in his body, a disk which contains his whole existence, he can
never perish. This disk remains always in the heap of ashes. There is
a condition, however, incident to the sun's resurrection: he must be
called. Every morning some one must rouse him, as a hireling is roused
to his daily labor. The morning star has that duty, and will never be
freed from it. While the sun exists, the morning star must call him.
At the summons of the star the golden disk springs from the pile of
ashes, the sun is renewed completely, and goes forth to run his race
till consumed again in the evening. Here we have the Phœnix rising
from its ashes daily instead of once in five centuries.

The system outlined in the myths contained in this volume is that of
the Wintus and Yanas, two stocks of Indians whom I shall describe
somewhat later.

The Wintu system is remarkable for the peculiar development of the
chief divinity, Olelbis, called also Nomhliëstawa.

The word "Olelbis" is formed of three etymological elements: ol, up;
el, in; bis, dwelling or sitting,--dwelling on high. Nomhliëstawa is
formed also of three elements: nom, west; hliës, to hurl; and tawa,
left-handed. Both names are epithets, and the Wintus have forgotten
who or what their chief divinity is; at least I have not been able to
find a man among them who could give information on this subject.
Olelbis lives in the highest part of the sky; with him are the best of
the first people. From his beautiful house, Olelpanti Hlut, he sees
everything on earth, and seems more real and familiar than any
divinity connected with other tribes. He is certainly more effective
in management, more active than any divinity of other Indian stocks,
so far as I know.

Olelbis disposes of the first people, except in a few cases, and he
retains with himself whomsoever he likes. He sends to the earth and
transforms those whom he thinks more useful below than above, and
gives the example of a single ruling divinity which, without being
all-powerful or all-wise, is able, through the knowledge and services
of others, to bear rule over the world in all places and everywhere.

The two old women, the grandmothers, are interesting persons,
counsellors of the chief divinity, rainmakers, wise with a knowledge
of people of whom Olelbis is ignorant, at least professedly. These old
women have been turned into a stone which has a spongy appearance and
looks like the inside or porous portion of bones which are without
marrow.

The great majority of Wintu metamorphoses are effected by Olelbis.
The only exceptions are those of Sas, Hawt, and Tichelis, transformed
by Tulchuherris, and certain changes such as those of color produced
at the great musical contest given by Waida Dikit. When each played on
a flute at that contest till he had done his best, till he had lost
breath, then he changed color. Though the Wintu system differs much in
detail from others, it agrees perfectly with all bodies of mythology
on the great point, the main principle, metamorphosis. Through
metamorphosis, all things have become what they are; through
revelation it was learned that the metamorphoses took place, and in
what way they took place. We must not consider the final act as the
whole; the change had been in process for a long period, and the final
words from opponents in conflict, the commands of Olelbis, the
decisions of personages who changed themselves at the approach of
Indians, or at signs of their coming, are but the very last act, the
final incident, the official ending, so to speak, of an immensely long
career in each case.

Of course there is no true information in the American ethnic religion
as to the real changes which affected the world around us; but there
is in it, as in all systems like it, true information regarding the
history of the human mind. Every ethnic religion gives us documentary
evidence. It gives us positive facts which, in their own sphere, are
as true as are facts of geology in the history of the earth's crust
and surface. They do not tell us what took place in the world without,
in the physical universe, they had no means of doing so; but they do
tell us what took place at certain periods in the world of mind, in
the interior of man.

The term "ethnic religion" needs some explanation, perhaps, before we
go further. An ethnic or primitive religion is one which belongs to
people of one blood and language, people who increased and developed
together with the beliefs of every sort which belong to them. Such a
religion includes every species of knowledge, every kind of custom,
institution, and art. Every aboriginal nation or human brood has its
gods. All people of one blood and origin are under the immediate care
and supervision of their gods, and preserve continual communication
and converse with them. According to their own beliefs, such people
received from their gods all that they have, all that they practise,
all that they know. Such people, while their blood is unmixed and
their society unconquered, adhere to their gods with the utmost
fidelity.

The bonds which connect a nation with its gods, bonds of faith, and
those which connect the individuals of that nation with one another,
bonds of blood, are the strongest known to primitive man, and are the
only social bonds in prehistoric ages. This early stage was the one in
which even the most advanced group of Indians in America found
themselves when the continent was discovered.

On the Eastern hemisphere, where there were so many races quite
distinct and different from one another, the conquest of one race by
another, or the conquest of a number of races by one, was frequent and
had a great influence on thought and on religion. The influence of one
religion or system of thought on another was sometimes considerable,
as the intellectual influence of Egypt on Greece, and sometimes great,
as that of Greece on Rome.

The influence of the physical conquest of many by one was immense
politically and socially, as in the case of Rome, which subdued Greece
and, together with Greece, all that Alexander had conquered in Asia
and Egypt. With the ruin of Carthage, Rome destroyed the ancient
thought of Phœnicia, which was closely akin to the earliest Hebrew,
and one of the most important among Semitic nations. With the conquest
and assimilation of Transalpine and Cisalpine Gaul, the whole ancient
fabric of Keltic thought on the continent gave way, and its chief
elements were lost soon after.

The last of the ethnic religions of Europe, and one of the most
valuable, that of the Lithuanians, continued in perfect condition till
the fifteenth century, when it was ended through bloodshed and
violence. This last of the systems of primitive Aryan thought in
Europe passed away leaving slight traces. We know the names of some of
its divinities; we know that it resembled the Slav, but was more
developed, that it had sacred serpents and priestesses who guarded the
holy, unquenchable fire; but, to the great regret of men of science,
we have only small fragments of the system, brief and meagre accounts
of it.

If we look closely into the religious history of the Eastern
hemisphere, we shall find the position to be approximately as
follows,--

In the oldest of the inscriptional versions of the "Book of the Dead"
on the walls of pyramids, we find the religion of Egypt advanced far
beyond the first stages of development. Though animals, birds,
reptiles, and insects occupy a prominent position in Egyptian
religion, it is not evident why they occupy that position. There is no
inscription or book to inform us. The earliest stage of Egyptian
religion is lost to us. Egyptian priests, when reproached for the
national worship rendered various animals, birds, reptiles, and
insects, creatures that were vile, useful, clean, or unclean, as the
case might be, were unable to give a cause for the worship. They were
unable for the reason that the mythologic account was unknown to them,
or had been lost or was unconsidered; whatever the reason, neither
papyrus nor inscription explains it.

The chief gods of priestly Egypt answered exactly to the Indian
divinities of the second class of myths in America, those which I have
called action myths. Among these the sun and the earth were very
prominent. Of the earliest gods of Egypt, those which answered to the
"first people," or divinities in American creation myths, we find no
account thus far. If we had that account, it would explain why there
are animals, reptiles, and insects in Egyptian religion.

In Greece those portions of the earliest mythology which were not lost
were obscured. The ancient creation myths were either misunderstood,
or were unknown to the educated at the period from which the first
literary monuments have come down to us. Hesiod arranged and shaped
Greek mythology to suit himself and his audience, so that it is quite
impossible to learn from that author what the primitive myths of
Greece were. If brought before him, he would doubtless have looked on
them much as a certain French Algonkin and Iroquois scholar of Canada
looked on the myths of America. The man had an extensive knowledge of
Algonkin and Iroquois words, but an utter contempt for Indian thought,
and no real knowledge of it whatever. When I mentioned Indian
mythology, he exclaimed: "Mais, Monsieur, c'est quelque chose
d'absurde."

No doubt the earliest creation myths were well known throughout rural
Greece among the illiterate, but there was no philosopher of that day
who knew their value. There was no man to consider them.

Roman mythology, as well as Greek, suffered from literary treatment,
and it is only by collecting detached fragments and facts of primitive
thought throughout the whole field of classic literature that we are
able to get at something beyond the official religion of polished
society in Greece and Rome.

From the wreck of ancient Keltic and Teutonic thought much has been
saved on the two islands of Ireland and Iceland. With this, together
with the American system and the mythologic inheritance of the Slav
world in Eastern Europe, we shall be able perhaps to obtain materials
with which to explain the earliest epoch of Aryan thought, the epoch
which corresponds in development with the world of American creation
myths. In that case we shall gain a connected view of Aryan
speculation and its methods from those early beginnings when there was
no passion or quality apart from a person, when symbols, metaphors,
and personifications were in the distant future. The whole problem is
to connect the thought of this continent with that of the rest of
mankind, but especially and above all with the Aryan and Semitic
divisions of it.

It is to be regretted that Semitic beliefs of the primitive period
have not come down to us more numerously; for example, those of the
Phœnicians, the earliest Hebrews, and other kindred nations.
Fortunately the Arabs, the most poetic of the race, the knightly
members of it, have given us in their history one fact of great value.
Just before the establishment of the new religion by Mohammed there
were in Mecca more than three hundred Arabic divinities, animal,
vegetable, and mineral. We can hardly doubt that the pre-Mohammedan
Arabic system of religion was the one which on a time belonged to the
whole Semitic race, different among some divisions of it in details,
of course, but substantially the same everywhere. This statement of
the Arabic condition contains a fact of immense significance. It
points to a system exactly like the American. The pre-Mohammedan
Arabic was the most splendid and important survival of primitive
religion in any historic race on the Eastern Hemisphere.

It is proper here to explain the position of spirits in the Indian
systems. All the first people are conceived as having bodies as well
as spirits. When we speak of a spirit appearing to a sorcerer or
"doctor," it is understood that that spirit has left its body
temporarily and will return to it. There are no spirits without bodies
save an exceptional few who at the time of the metamorphosis of the
first people lost the bodies which had belonged to them in their
primal condition and received no new bodies at their fall. This loss
of bodies was inflicted as a punishment. These desolate disembodied
spirits wander about now in mountains and lonely weird places. Uncanny
in character, they are seen rarely, and then only by sorcerers.

A good deal has been given to the world of late on mythology by able
writers who with good materials would attain good results; but as the
materials at their disposal are faulty, much of their work with all
its cleverness is mainly a persistent pouring of the empty into the
void.

We have seen attempts made to show that real gods have been developed
by savage men from their own dead savage chiefs. Such a thing has
never been done since the human race began, and it could never have
been imagined by any man who knew the ideas of primitive races from
actual experience or from competent testimony. The most striking thing
in all savage belief is the low estimate put on man when unaided by
divine, uncreated power. In Indian belief every object in the universe
is divine except man. Divinities have an immense range of power, there
is an incalculable difference between the greatest and the smallest of
them,--some have inconceivable strength and knowledge, while others
are measurably weak and of limited intelligence,--but all belong to
one category, all are divine, all are extra-human.

Vegetable gods, so called, have been scoffed at by writers on
mythology. The scoff is baseless, for the first people were turned, or
turned themselves, into trees and various plants as frequently as into
beasts and other creatures. Maize or Indian corn is a transformed god
who gave himself to be eaten to save man from hunger and death. When
Spanish priests saw little cakes of meal eaten ceremonially by
Indians, and when the latter informed them that they were eating their
god, the good priests thought this a diabolical mockery of the Holy
Sacrament, and a blasphemous trick of Satan to ruin poor ignorant
Indians.

I have a myth in which the main character is a violent and cruel old
personage who is merciless and faith-breaking, who does no end of
damage till he is cornered at last by a good hero and turned into the
wild parsnip. Before transformation this old parsnip could travel
swiftly, but now he must stay in one place, and of course kills
people only when they eat him.

The treasure saved to science by the primitive race of America is
unique in value and high significance. The first result from it is to
carry us back through untold centuries to that epoch when man made the
earliest collective and consistent explanation of this universe and
its origin.

Occupying this vantage-ground, we can now throw a flood of light on
all those mythologies and ethnic religions or systems of thought from
which are lost in part, great or small, the materials needed to prove
the foundation and beginnings of each of them. In this condition are
all ancient recorded religions, whether of Greece, Rome, Egypt,
Chaldea, Persia, or India.

Through amazing ability of primitive man on this continent to retain,
or perhaps through his inability to change or go forward, he has
preserved a system of thought already old at the time of the first
cuneiform letters and of the earliest statements on stone or papyrus.
And the discovery of this system of ours coincides almost with the
moment when America after a century and a quarter of free political
activity, and of intellectual labor unexampled in fruitfulness, takes
her due place as a World Power, and enters into intimate and searching
relations, not with Europe alone, or one section of mankind, but with
the whole human race wherever fixed or resident.

                                            JEREMIAH CURTIN.

    Washington, D. C., U. S. A.,
         October 11, 1898.




CREATION MYTHS OF PRIMITIVE AMERICA

[Decoration]




OLELBIS


PERSONAGES

After each name is given that of the beast, bird, or thing into which
the personage was changed subsequently. Names on which accents are not
placed are accented on the penult. Names of places are explained in
the notes. Kiemila and Herit mean "old" and "young," respectively;
they are applied to male persons. Pokaila and Loimis are applied to
females; the first means "old," the second "young."

=Bisus=, mink; =Chálilak=, goose; =Chuluhl=, meadow-lark; =Dokos=,
flint; =Hau=, red fox; =Héssiha=, tomtit; =Hilit=, house-fly;
=Hlihli=, white oak acorn; =Hus=, turkey buzzard; =Kahit=, wind;
=Kahsuku=, cloud dog; =Kaisus=, gray squirrel; =Kar=, gray heron;
=Karili=, coon; =Katkatchila=, swift; =Katsi=, chicken-hawk; =Kau=,
white crane; =Kiriú=, loon; =Klabus=, mole; =Klak=, rattlesnake;
=Kuntihlé=, fish-hawk; =Lutchi=, humming-bird; =Mem Loimis=, water;
=Mem Tulit=, beaver; =Min Taitai=, sap-sucker; =Móihas=, bald eagle;
=Pákchuso=, the pakchu stone; =Patsotchet=, badger; =Poháramas=,
shooting star; =Sas=, sun; =Sedit=, coyote; =Sosini=, a small
web-footed bird; =Sútunut=, black eagle; =Tede Wiu=, a small bird;
=Tilichi=, a water-bird; =Tilikus=, fire drill; =Titchelis=, ground
squirrel; =Toko=, sunfish; =Tórihas=, blue crane; =Tsárarok=,
kingfisher; =Tsaroki Sakahl=, green snake; =Tsurat=, woodpecker; =Wehl
Dilidili=, road-runner; =Wima Loimis=, grizzly bear; =Wokwuk=, a large
bird, extinct; =Yilahl=, gopher; =Yoholmit=, frog; =Yonot=, buckeye
bush.

       *       *       *       *       *

The first that we know of Olelbis is that he was in Olelpanti. Whether
he lived in another place is not known, but in the beginning he was in
Olelpanti (on the upper side), the highest place. He was in Olelpanti
before there was anything down here on the earth, and two old women
were with him always. These old women he called grandmother, and each
of them we call Pakchuso Pokaila.

There was a world before this one in which we are now. That world
lasted a long, long time, and there were many people living in it
before the present world and we, the present people, came.

One time the people of that first world who were living then in the
country about here[1] were talking of those who lived in one place and
another. Down in the southwest was a person whose name was
Katkatchila. He could kill game wonderfully, but nobody knew how he
did it, nor could any one find out. He did not kill as others did; he
had something that he aimed and threw; he would point a hollow stick
which he had, and something would go out of it and kill the game. In
that time a great many people lived about this place where we are now,
and their chief was Torihas Kiemila; these people came together and
talked about Katkatchila.

    [1] That is, in the Upper Sacramento Valley.

Some one said: "I wonder if he would come up here if we sent for him."

"Let us send for him," said Torihas; "let us ask him to come; tell him
that we are going to have a great dance. To-morrow we will send some
one down to invite him."

Next morning Torihas sent a messenger to invite Katkatchila; he sent
Tsaroki Sakahl, a very quick traveller. Though it was far, Tsaroki
went there in one day, gave the invitation, and told about Torihas
and his people.

"I agree," said Katkatchila. "I will go in the morning."

Tsaroki went home in the night, and told the people that Katkatchila
would come on the following day.

"What shall we do?" asked they.

"First, we will dance one night," said the chief; "then we will take
him out to hunt and see how he kills things."

Katkatchila had a sister; she had a husband and one child. She never
went outdoors herself. She was always in the house. Nobody ever saw
the woman or her child.

When Katkatchila was ready to start he told his sister that he was
going, and said to his brother-in-law: "I am going. You must stay at
home while I am gone."

The sister was Yonot. Her husband was Tilikus.

Katkatchila came to a hill up here, went to the top of it, and sat
down. From the hill he could see the camp of the people who had
invited him. He stayed there awhile and saw many persons dancing. It
was in summer and about the middle of the afternoon. At last
Katkatchila went down to where they were dancing, and stopped a little
way off. Torihas, who was watching, saw him and said,--

"Come right over here, Katkatchila, and sit by me."

Olelbis was looking down from Olelpanti at this moment, and said to
the old women, "My grandmothers, I see many people collected on
earth; they are going to do something."

Katkatchila sat down and looked on. Soon all the people stopped
dancing and went to their houses. Torihas had food brought to
Katkatchila after his journey. While he was eating, Torihas said to
him,--

"My grandson, I and all my people have lived here very long. My people
want to dance and hunt. I sent one of them to ask you to come up here.
They will dance to-night and go hunting to-morrow."

Torihas stood up then and said,--

"You my people, we will all dance to-night and to-morrow morning we
will go to hunt. Do not leave home, any of you. Let all stay. We will
have a great hunt. Katkatchila, will you stay with us?" asked he. "I
shall be glad if you go and hunt with us."

"I will go with you," said Katkatchila. "I am glad to go."

They danced all night. Next morning, after they had eaten, and just as
they were starting off to hunt, the chief said to his people,--

"I will send my grandson with Katkatchila, and some of you, my sons,
stay near him."

Some said to others: "When Katkatchila shoots a deer, let us run right
up and take out of the deer the thing with which he killed it, and
then we won't give it back to him."

"Do you stay with him, too," said Torihas to Kaisus, who was a swift
runner.

The whole party, a great many people, went to Hau Buli to hunt. When
they got onto the mountain they saw ten deer. Katkatchila shot without
delay; as soon as he shot a deer fell, and Kaisus, who was ready, made
a rush and ran up to the deer, but Katkatchila was there before him
and had taken out the weapon.

He killed all ten of the deer one after another, and Kaisus ran each
time to be first at the fallen body, but Katkatchila was always ahead
of him. When they went home Kaisus carried one deer, and told of all
they had done, saying,--

"Now you people, go and bring in the other deer. I don't believe any
man among us can run as fast as Katkatchila; he is a wonderful runner.
I don't know what he uses to kill game, and I don't think we can get
it away from him."

That night Hau spoke up among his friends and said, "I will go with
Katkatchila to-morrow and see what I can do."

A great many of the people talked about Katkatchila that night,
saying,--

"We do not think that he will ever come to us again, so we must all do
our best to get his weapon while he is here."

Katkatchila was ready to go home after the hunt, but Torihas persuaded
him, saying: "Stay one day more. Hunt with us to-morrow."

Katkatchila agreed to stay. Next morning they went to hunt. Hau went
among others, and stayed near Katkatchila all the time.

On the mountain they saw ten deer again. Katkatchila stood back to
shoot. Hau was ready to spring forward to get the weapon. The moment
the weapon was shot, Hau ran with all his strength, reached the deer
first, took out the weapon and hid it in his ear.

That moment Katkatchila was there. "You have taken my flint!" cried
he. "Give it back!"

"I have not taken it," said Hau. "I have nothing of yours. I have just
come."

"You have it. I saw you take it," said Katkatchila.

"I took nothing. I only put my hand on the deer's head."

"I saw you take it."

"No, you did not. I haven't it."

Katkatchila kept asking all day for his flint, but Hau would neither
give it back nor own that he had it. At last, when the sun was almost
down, Katkatchila turned to Hau and said,--

"I saw you take my flint. It would be better for you to give it back
to me, better for you and very much better for your people. You want
to keep the flint; well, keep it. You will see something in pay for
this, something that will not make you glad."

He left the hunt and went away in great anger, travelled all night and
was at home next morning.

Torihas's people went back from the hunt, and Hau with the others. He
went into the sweat-house, took the flint out of his ear and held it
on his palm. Every one came and looked at it. It was just a small bit
of a thing.

"When I took this," said Hau, "Katkatchila got very angry; he left us
on the mountain and went home."

All the people stood around looking at the flint in Hau's hand.

"You have done wrong, you people," said Patsotchet. "Katkatchila is
very strong and quick; you will see what he will do. He has great
power, more power than you think, and he will have vengeance. He will
make us suffer terribly. He is stronger than we are. He can do
anything. You will see something dreadful before long."

"Now, my people," said Torihas, "come into the sweat-house and we will
see what we can do with that flint."

All went in. Hau went last, for he had the flint. He held it out,
showed it again, and said, "I took this because you people wanted it."

They passed the flint from one to another; all looked at it, all
examined it. One old man said: "Give it to me here, let me see it." He
got it in his hand, and said: "Now all go outside of the sweat-house."

This was Hilit Kiemila. They went out, leaving him alone. Patsotchet
kept on repeating, "Katkatchila is angry, he is malicious; before long
we shall see what will happen."

As soon as Hilit was alone in the sweat-house, he began to rub the
flint with his hands and roll it with his legs (Hilit was turned
afterward into a house-fly, and that is why house-flies keep rubbing
their legs against each other to this day). He wanted to make the
flint large. After he had rolled and rubbed the flint all night, it
was four or five feet long, and as thick and wide. He let the block
fall to the ground and it made a great noise, a very loud noise;
people heard it for a long distance. Hilit went out then and said,--

"Go in, all you people, and look at that good flint."

They went and looked. It was almost daylight at the time, and each one
said,--

"Well, I don't know what is best to do; perhaps it would be best to
send this off. It may be bad for us to keep it here; bad for us to
have it in the sweat-house or the village."

They did not know who could carry the great block, it was so heavy.
"Perhaps Patsotchet can carry it," said they.

Torihas went outside and called Patsotchet, saying: "Come into the
sweat-house a little while. You come seldom; but come now."

Patsotchet left his house, which was near by, and went into the
sweat-house.

"What are you going to do?" asked he. "It is too late to do anything
now. I have known a long time about Katkatchila. He is very strong. He
will do something terrible as soon as daylight comes."

"Patsotchet," said Torihas, "you are a good man. I wish you would take
this big flint and carry it far away off north."

"I don't want to take it," said Patsotchet. "It is too heavy."

Torihas went to Karili, who lived a little way off, and said: "Come
into the sweat-house. I wish to talk with you."

Karili went in. "Take this block," said Torihas. "No one is willing to
carry it away, but you are strong. Carry it north for me."

Karili took up the flint, but when he had it outside the house he
said: "I cannot carry this. It is too heavy. I am not able to carry
it."

Torihas called in Tichelis, and said: "My uncle, will you take this
north for me?"

"Why will not others take it? Why are they unwilling to carry it?"
asked Tichelis. "Well, I will take it," said he, after thinking a
little; and he made ready.

"Take it and start right away," said Torihas. "Daylight is coming. Go
straight. I will go, too, and when I am on the top of Toriham Pui
Toror I will shout, and show you where to put the block."

Tichelis put the flint on his back and hurried away with it.

When Katkatchila reached home he told his brother-in-law, Tilikus, and
his brother-in-law's brother, Poharamas, and Yonot, his sister, how
his flint had been stolen.

It was just before sunrise. Tilikus and Poharamas went out in front of
the house and swept a space clean and smooth; then they ran off to the
east and got pine as full of pitch as they could find it. They brought
a great deal of this, split some very fine, and made a large pile
there on the smooth place.

Just at this time Torihas's people were in his sweat-house talking
about the theft. "Nothing will happen," said most of them; "old
Patsotchet is always talking in that way, foretelling trouble. We will
dance to-day. Tichelis has carried that thing far away; all will be
well now."

Yonot, Katkatchila's sister, had one child, a little baby which she
called Pohila (fire child). The woman never left the house herself,
and never let any one carry the child out.

"Now, my sister," said Katkatchila, "bring your child here; bring my
nephew out, and put him on that nice, smooth place which we have swept
clean; it will be pleasant there for him."

She brought the boy out, put him on the smooth place. Poharamas was on
the southeast side all ready, and Tilikus on the southwest side. As
soon as Yonot put down the baby, they pushed pitch-pine sticks toward
it. That instant fire blazed up. When the fire had caught well
Poharamas took a large burning brand of pitch-pine and rushed off to
the southeast; Tilikus took another and ran to the southwest.
Poharamas, when he reached the southeast where the sky comes to the
earth, ran around northward close to the sky; he held the point of his
burning brand on the ground, and set fire to everything as he ran.
When Tilikus reached the southwest, at the place where the sky touches
the earth, he ran northward near the sky. The two brothers went
swiftly, leaving a line of flame behind them, and smoke rose in a
cloud with the fire.

After the two had started Yonot snatched up Pohila, and as she raised
the boy a great flame flashed up from the spot. She ran into the house
with her son, and put him into the basket where she had kept him till
that morning.

Torihas's people had begun to dance. Some time after sunrise they saw
a great fire far away on the east and on the west as well.

"Oh, look at the fire on both sides!" said one.

"It is far off, and won't come here," said another.

"I feel the heat already!" cried a third.

Soon all saw that the fire was coming toward them from the east and
the west like waves of high water, and the line of it was going
northward quickly. The fire made a terrible roar as it burned; soon
everything was seething. Everywhere people were trying to escape, all
were rushing toward the north. By the middle of the forenoon the heat
and burning were so great that people began to fall down, crying
out,--

"Oh, I'm hot! Ah, I'm hot!"

Torihas made a rush toward the north, and reached the top of Toriham
Pui Toror. When he saw the fire coming very near he called out to
Tichelis, who was struggling along with the great block of flint on
his back,--

"Go ahead with the flint! Go on, go on, the fire is far from here, far
behind us!"

Tichelis heard the shouting, but said nothing; kept going northward
steadily. When he was northeast of Bohem Puyuk, he saw the fire coming
very fast, a mighty blaze roaring up to the sky. It was coming from
the south, east, west. Tichelis could go no farther; there was no
place for escape above ground; the fire would soon be where he was.
The flint had grown very hot from the burning; he threw it down; it
had skinned his back, it was so hot and heavy. He ran under the
ground, went as far as he could, and lay there. Presently he heard the
fire roaring above him, the ground was burning, he was barely alive;
soon all blazed up, earth, rocks, everything.

Tichelis went up in flames and smoke toward the sky.

When the brothers Tilikus and Poharamas had carried the fire around
the world and met in the north, just half-way between east and west,
they struck their torches together and threw them on the ground. The
moment before they joined the burning brands two persons rushed out
between them. One was Klabus and the other Tsaroki, who had carried
the invitation from Torihas to Katkatchila. They just escaped.

The flint rock that Tichelis dropped lies there yet, just where it
fell, and when the Wintu people want black flint they find it in that
place.

Poharamas and Tilikus ran home as soon as they struck their torches
together.

Katkatchila had a little brother. He put the boy on his back, and went
beyond the sky where it touches the earth in the south.

Yonot, the mother of Pohila, took her son and went behind the sky; her
husband, Tilikus, went with her. Poharamas went to Olelpanti. He flew
up to where Olelbis is.

Olelbis looked down into the burning world. He could see nothing but
waves of flame; rocks were burning, the ground was burning, everything
was burning. Great rolls and piles of smoke were rising; fire flew up
toward the sky in flames, in great sparks and brands. Those sparks
became kolchituh (sky eyes), and all the stars that we see now in the
sky came from that time when the first world was burned. The sparks
stuck fast in the sky, and have remained there ever since the time of
the wakpohas (world fire). Quartz rocks and fire in the rocks are from
that time. There was no fire in the rocks before the wakpohas.

When Klabus escaped he went east outside the sky, went to a place
called Pom Wai Hudi Pom. Tsaroki went up on the eastern side of the
sky,--ran up outside.

Before the fire began Olelbis spoke to the two old women and said: "My
grandmothers, go to work for me and make a foundation. I wish to build
a sweat-house."

They dug out and cleared a place for the sweat-house the day before
the world-fire began. Olelbis built it in this way: When the two women
had dug the foundation, he asked,--

"What kind of wood shall I get for the central pillar of the house?"

"Go far down south," said the old grandmothers, "and get a great young
white oak, pull it up with the roots, bring it, and plant it in the
middle to support the house."

He went, found the tree, and brought it.

"Now, my grandmothers, what shall I do next?"

"Go north and bring a black oak with the roots. Go then to the west,
put your hand out, and there you will touch an oak different from
others."

He went north and west, and brought the two trees.

"Now," said Olelbis, "I want a tree from the east."

"Go straight east to a live-oak place, you can see it from here, get
one of those live-oaks." He brought it with the roots and said,--

"Now I want two trees more."

"Go to the southeast," said they, "where white oaks grow, and get two
of them."

He went and got two great white oak trees, pulled them up with the
roots, brought them with all the branches, which were covered with
acorns.

Olelbis put the great white oak from the south in the middle as the
central pillar; then he put the northern black oak on the north side;
he put it sloping, so that its branches were on the south side of the
house; over against this he put a southeastern white oak sloping in
like manner, so that its head came out on the north side. The western
oak he planted on the west side, sloping so that its branches hung on
the east side; then he put up the two white oaks from the southeast on
the east side: six trees in all. The top of each tree was outside
opposite its roots; acorns from it fell on the opposite side. Olelbis
wished to fasten the trees firmly together so they should never
loosen.

"Stop, grandson," said one of the old women. "How will you bind the
top?"

"I have nothing to bind it with," answered Olelbis.

She put her hand toward the south, and on it came humus koriluli (a
plant with beautiful blossoms). She took it with roots, stem, and
blossoms and made a long narrow mat, the stem and roots all woven
together inside and the blossoms outside. "Here, grandson," said she,
"put this around the top of the house and bind the trees with it
firmly."

He did this. The binding was beautiful and very fragrant. He wrapped
it around the trees where they came together at the top of the house
inside.

The two old women made four very large mats now, one for each side of
the house. They wove first a mat of yosoü (a plant about a foot high,
which has no branches and only a cluster of red flowers at the top).
When they had finished it they told Olelbis to put it on the north
side of the house.

"Now, my grandmothers," said Olelbis, "I want a cover for the east
side."

"My grandson," said each, "we are sorry that you are alone, sorry that
you have no one to help you in building this house. Now take this mat
and put it on the east side."

They gave him a mat made of the same plant that was used for a binding
to hold the top of the house.

"I want a cover now for the south side."

The old women put their hands to the east, and a plant came to them a
foot high with white blossoms, of very sweet odor. A great deal of
this plant came, and they made a mat of it. They put all the blossoms
outside. The mat covered the south side.

"Now, how shall I cover the west side?"

"We have the covering here already, made of kin-tekchi-luli" (a plant
with blue and white blossoms).

They put that mat on the west side, the blossoms turned outward.

The old women gave him all kinds of beautiful plants now, and flowers
to form a great bank around the bottom of the sweat-house. All kinds
of flowers that are in the world now were gathered around the foot of
that sweat-house, an enormous bank of them; every beautiful color and
every sweet odor in the world was there.

When they went into the sweat-house, the perfume was delightful. The
two old women said then:

"All people to come in the world below will talk of this house, and
call it Olelpanti Hlut when they tell about it and praise the house on
high."

Olelbis said: "I want to lay something lengthwise on each side of the
door. What shall I get?"

The two said: "We will get sau" (acorn bread made in a great round
roll like a tree-trunk).

They got sau, and put a roll at each side of the door; these rolls
were put there for people to sit on.

Olelbis walked around, looked at everything, and said,--

"I want this house to grow, to be wide and high, to be large enough
for all who will ever come to it."

Then the house began to extend and grow wider and higher, and it
became wonderful in size and in splendor. Just as daylight was coming
the house was finished and ready. It stood there in the morning dawn,
a mountain of beautiful flowers and oak-tree branches; all the colors
of the world were on it, outside and inside. The tree in the middle
was far above the top of the house, and filled with acorns; a few of
them had fallen on every side.

That sweat-house was placed there to last forever, the largest and
most beautiful building in the world, above or below. Nothing like it
will ever be built again.

"Now, my grandson," said the old women, "the house is built and
finished. All the people in the world will like this house. They will
talk about it and speak well of it always. This house will last
forever, and these flowers will bloom forever; the roots from which
they grow can never die."

The world fire began on the morning after the sweat-house was
finished. During the fire they could see nothing of the world below
but flames and smoke. Olelbis did not like this.

"Grandson," said the old women, "we will tell you what to do to put
out that terrible wakpohas. There is a very old man, Kahit Kiemila,
and he lives far north toward the east, outside the first sky. He
stays there in one little place; he is all alone, and always in the
same place. Tell him what to do, and he will do it. If you don't like
the fire and smoke down below, tell the old man to turn his face
toward you, to come this way and to bring with him Mem Loimis. He sits
with his head between his hands and his face to the north, and never
looks up. The place where he sits is called Waiken Pom Pui Humok Pom."

The first person who came to Olelbis on the day of the fire was Kiriu
Herit. He came about daylight.

"You have finished the sweat-house, my nephew," said he.

"I have," said Olelbis, "but we are going to have trouble, and do you,
my uncle, go up on the west side of the sweat-house, look around
everywhere, and tell me what you see."

Kiriu went to the top of the house and looked. Soon another man came
and said, "My brother, you have finished the sweat-house."

"Yes," said Olelbis, "and do you, my brother, go up on the east side
of the house, stand there, and call to Kahit."

This was Lutchi Herit. Two more came and saluted Olelbis. "Go into the
sweat-house," said he. These were the two brothers, Tilichi. A fifth
person came, Kuntihle, and then a sixth, Sutunut, a great person.
Lutchi kept darting around, looking toward the north and calling:
"Kahit cannot take me! Kahit cannot take me!" Kahit was getting angry
by this time, and thinking to turn and look at Lutchi, for though far
away, he heard the noise of his darting and his calling. "That old
Kahit may come out, but he cannot catch me!" called Lutchi, as he
darted around, always watching the north.

Now Olelbis called Lutchi and Sutunut, and said: "You, Lutchi, go
north, pry up the sky and prop it; here is a sky pole and a sky prop."
Turning to Sutunut, he plucked a feather from each of his wings and
said: "Go to Kahit in Waiken Pom Pui Humok Pom; tell him to come south
with Mem Loimis. She lives not far from him. Her house is in the
ground. And tell him to blow his whistle with all his breath. Put
these two feathers on his cheeks just in front of his ears."

Lutchi went quickly. No one could travel as fast as he. He reached the
sky on the north, raised and propped it. Sutunut gave the message to
Kahit, who raised his head from between his hands slowly and turned
toward the south. Sutunut put the feathers in his cheeks then, as
Olelbis had commanded.

One person, Sotchet, who lived just south of Kahit, spoke up now and
said,--

"Go ahead, Kahit. I am in a hurry to see my father, Olelbis. I will
follow you. I am drinking my mother's milk." (He was doing that to
bring great water.) His mother was Mem Loimis.

"Come with me, Mem Loimis," said Kahit to Sotchet's mother. "When I
start, go ahead a little. I will help you forward."

Olelbis was watching, and thought, "Kahit is ready to start, and Mem
Loimis is with him."

Olelbis made then an oak paddle, and hurled it to where Sotchet was.
Sotchet caught the paddle, made a tail of it, put it on, and went
plashing along through the water. Not far from Kahit lived an old
woman, Yoholmit Pokaila. She made a basket of white willow, and
finished it just as Mem Loimis was ready to start. In the same place
was Sosini Herit, just ready to move. In one hand he held a bow and
arrows, with the other he was to swim.

Olelbis saw all this,--saw and knew what people were doing or
preparing to do. "Grandmothers," said he, "Mem Loimis is ready to
move. Kahit is ready. All the people around them will follow."

The great fire was blazing, roaring all over the earth, burning rocks,
earth, trees, people, burning everything.

Mem Loimis started, and with her Kahit. Water rushed in through the
open place made by Lutchi when he raised the sky. It rushed in like a
crowd of rivers, covered the earth, and put out the fire as it rolled
on toward the south. There was so much water outside that could not
come through that it rose to the top of the sky and rushed on toward
Olelpanti.

Olelbis went to the top of the sweat-house and stood looking toward
the north. Sula Kiemila and Toko Kiemila had come that morning. "Take
your places north of the sweat-house," said Olelbis, and they did so.
Olelbis saw everything coming toward him in the water from the north,
all kinds of people who could swim. They were so many that no one
could count them. Before he had built the sweat-house, the two
grandmothers had said to Olelbis: "Go far south and get pilok, which
is a tall plant with a strong fibre, and make a cord." He did so, and
twisted a strong cord from pilok. Of this he made a sling. He put his
hand to the west, and kilson came on it, a round white stone an inch
and a half in diameter. He put the stone in the sling, tied the sling
around his head, and kept it there always.

He took this sling in his hand now, and stood watching ready to throw
the stone at something that was coming in the water. Olelbis threw
with his left hand. He was left-handed, and for this reason was called
Nomhlyestawa (throwing west with the left hand).

Mem Loimis went forward, and water rose mountains high. Following
closely after Mem Loimis came Kahit. He had a whistle in his mouth; as
he moved forward he blew it with all his might, and made a terrible
noise. The whistle was his own; he had had it always. He came flying
and blowing. He looked like an enormous bat, with wings spread. As he
flew south toward the other side of the sky, his two cheek feathers
grew straight out, became immensely long, waved up and down, grew till
they could touch the sky on both sides.

While Kahit flew on and was blowing his whistle, old Yoholmit lay in
her basket; she floated in it high on the great waves, and laughed and
shouted, "Ho! ho!"

"How glad my aunt is to see water; hear how she laughs!" said Olelbis.
And he gave her two new names, Surut Womulmit (hair-belt woman) and
Mem Hlosmulmit (water-foam woman). "Look at my aunt," said Olelbis
again. "She is glad to see water!"

As Yoholmit was laughing and shouting she called out,--

"Water, you be big! Grow all the time! Be deep so that I can float and
float on, float all my life."

Olelbis was watching everything closely. Sosini Herit was coming. He
held a bow and arrows in one hand and swam with the other. He was next
behind old Yoholmit.

"Look at my brother, Sosini, look at him swimming," said Olelbis. When
mountains of water were coming near swiftly, Olelbis said to the two
old women, "Go into the sweat-house." The two brothers, Kuntihle and
Tede Wiu, went in also. Olelbis stood ready to use his sling. When
Yoholmit was coming near, he hurled a stone at her. He did not hit
her. He did not wish to hit her. He hit the basket and sent her far
away east in it until the basket struck the sky.

When the water reached Toko, it divided, went east and west, went no
farther south in Olelpanti. At this time Olelbis saw a hollow log
coming from the north. On it were sitting a number of Tede Memtulit
and Bisus people. Just behind the log came some one with a big
willow-tree in his mouth, sometimes swimming east, sometimes swimming
west. He slapped the water with his new tail, making a loud noise.
This was Sotchet, the son of Mem Loimis. Olelbis struck the log with
a stone from his sling, and threw it far away west with all the
Memtulits on it except one, which came to the sweat-house and said,--

"My brother, I should like to stay with you here." This was Tede
Memtulit.

"Stay here," said Olelbis.

Next came Wokwuk. He was large and beautiful, and had very red eyes.
When Kahit came flying toward the sweat-house, and was still north of
it, Olelbis cried to him,--

"My uncle, we have had wind enough and water enough; can you not stop
them?"

Kahit flew off toward the east and sent Mem Loimis back. "Mem Loimis,"
said he, "you are very large and very strong, but I am stronger. Go
back! If not, I will stop you. Go home!"

Mem Loimis went back north, went into the ground where she had lived
before. Kahit went east, then turned and went north to where he had
been at first, and sat down again in silence with his head between his
hands.

When Mem Loimis and Kahit had gone home, all water disappeared; it was
calm, dry, and clear again everywhere. Olelbis looked down on the
earth, but could see nothing: no mountains, no trees, no ground,
nothing but naked rocks washed clean. He stood and looked in every
direction,--looked east, north, west, south, to see if he could find
anything. He found nothing. After a time he saw in the basin of a
great rock some water, all that was left. The rock was in Tsarau
Heril.

"My grandmothers," asked Olelbis, "what shall I do now? Look
everywhere, there is nothing in the world below but naked rocks. I
don't like it."

"Wait awhile, grandson," said they. "We will look and see if we can
find something somewhere. Perhaps we can."

On this earth there was no river, no creek, no water in any place but
that water at Tsarau Heril. This was the morning after Mem Loimis had
gone home.

Now a person came from the east to Olelpanti, Klabus Herit. "My
uncle," said Olelbis to Klabus, "I am looking all over the world
below, but can see nothing on it. Do you know any place beyond the sky
on the north, south, east, or west, where there is earth?

"I know no place where there is earth," said Klabus.

Soon another person, Yilahl Herit, was seen coming from the west. When
he came up, Olelbis asked,--

"My uncle, do you know of earth, or trees, or people in any place
beyond the sky?"

"I do not," answered Yilahl. "But are you all well here?"

"We are well and unharmed," answered Olelbis.

"How did you come here? Which way did you come? Where did you stay
that the world fire did not burn you?" asked Klabus of Yilahl.

"I will tell you," said Yilahl. "When the fire began, I went west, I
went under the sky where it touches the lower world, I went out to
the other side. The fire did not go there. There is earth now in that
place."

"My uncles," said Olelbis, "I want you both to go down, to go west,
and get that earth for me."

"I will go," said Klabus; and turning to the two old women he said:
"Give me two baskets, very large round baskets."

The old women made two very large baskets. Klabus took these and went
west with Yilahl. As soon as they started Olelbis took a great sky net
(kolchi koro), and it spread out; it reached to the ends of the sky in
every direction; it was full of small, fine holes, like a sieve. He
spread it out in Olelpanti; put it under his sweat-house. It is above
this world yet, but we cannot see it.

Klabus and Yilahl went west to where the earth was. Klabus dug it up
and filled the baskets quickly; went to the north side of the
sweat-house and threw the earth into the great net, then hurried back
and brought more earth and threw it on the net. It went through the
net and fell down here, fell on the rocks in this world like rain.

Klabus hurried back and forth very quickly, carrying one basket on
each arm. He was going and coming for five days and five nights; fine
earth was falling all this time, till the rocks were covered, and
there was plenty of earth everywhere.

Yilahl gave no help. He went down the first time with Klabus, showed
him the earth, and stayed there, but he did not help to carry earth or
to dig it.

When Klabus had covered all the rocks with good earth, Olelbis told
him to rest.

"Go west and tell Yilahl to help you," said Olelbis to Klabus the next
morning, after he had rested. "Tell him to work with you, fixing the
earth which you have thrown down. Go, both of you; make mountains,
hills, and level country; arrange everything."

No fire was visible anywhere; every bit had been quenched by the flood
which came in after Lutchi propped up the sky. Yilahl came out into
this world below from under the edge of the sky in the west, and
Klabus came out from under it in the east. Both met and went to work.
Yilahl made the small hills and fixed the rolling country. Klabus
raised the great mountains and mountain ranges. There was nothing but
earth and rock yet; no people at work only these two, Klabus and
Yilahl.

Olelbis stood watching and looking; he looked five days, found no fire
in any place. Next day he saw a little smoke in the southwest coming
straight up as if through a small opening. Olelbis had a Winishuyat on
his head tied in his hair, and the Winishuyat said to him,--

"My brother, look; there is a little fire away down south; a woman
there has fire in a small basket."

This woman was Yonot, the mother of Pohila, who had gone back to live
in her old house.

"My brother," said Olelbis, turning to Tede Wiu, "do you see that
place there? Go and bring fire from it."

Tede Wiu went quickly to the place where Olelbis had seen the smoke.
He found a house, and looking through a crack he saw the glow of fire,
but not the fire itself.

Tede Wiu stayed five days and nights watching. He could not get into
the house where the basket was. That house was closed firmly, and had
no door. At last he went back to Olelpanti without fire.

"I should like to catch the fish which I see jumping in that southern
water," said Kuntihle, "but we could not cook fish if we had it, for
we have no fire."

"You would better go yourself and try to get fire," said Olelbis.

Kuntihle went and watched five days. He could not get into the house,
and no fire fell out. He went back to Olelpanti.

"We need fire," said Olelbis, "but how are we to get it? Go again and
try," said he to Tede Wiu; "watch till fire falls out, or go in and
take some."

Klabus and Yilahl were at work yet.

Tede Wiu went, crept under the house, watched five days and nights,
stayed right under the basket in which Pohila was. On the sixth
morning, very early, just at daybreak, a spark of fire fell out. Tede
Wiu caught the spark, ran off quickly to Olelbis, and gave it to him.

They had fire in Olelpanti now, and were glad. Neither Yonot, the
mother, nor Tilikus, the father of Pohila, knew that fire had been
carried away to Olelpanti.

Klabus and Yilahl were still at work making the mountains and
valleys, and had almost finished.

Now that there was fire in Olelpanti, Kuntihle said: "I will go and
see that fish. Tilitchi, will you come with me?"

Tilitchi went. Before they started Olelbis gave them a fish net. They
caught a fish, and went back, dressed, cooked, and ate it.

"This is a good fish," said Olelbis. "How did it get into that water?
That pond in the rock is small and round; there is no water to run
into it. Grandmothers, what shall we do with this pond and the fish in
it?"

"We will tell you," said the old women. "Go to the west under the sky,
break off a strip of the sky, bring it here, and make a pointed pole
of it."

Klabus and Yilahl were just putting the top on Bohem Puyuk; all the
other mountains in the world were finished.

Olelbis went west, got the sky pole, and pointed one end of it. He
stuck the pole down at the foot of Bohem Puyuk, drew the point of it
along southward, making a deep furrow. Then he stuck the pole far
north, and made a second furrow to join the eastern end of the first
one. There was no water in either furrow yet, and Olelbis said,--

"Now, my grandmothers, what shall I do next?"

"Take this grapevine root," said they. "Throw it to the place where
you thrust in the pole at the foot of Bohem Puyuk."

He threw the root. One end of it went into the mountain, the other
hung out; from this water flowed.

"This will be called Wini Mem," said the grandmothers. "The country
around it will be good; many people will go there to live in the
future."

The grandmothers gave a second root, a tule root, and Olelbis threw
this far up north, where one end stuck in the ground as had the
grapevine root, and from the other end flowed Pui Mem--there is much
tule at the head of Pui Mem to this day.

Olelbis took his sky pole again and made deep furrows down southward
from Bohema Mem, large ones for large rivers and smaller ones for
creeks. Water flowed and filled the furrows, flowed southward till it
reached the place where Kuntihle found the first fish; and when the
large river reached that little pond, fish went out of it into the
river, and from the river into all creeks and rivers.

When the rivers were finished, and water was running in them, Olelbis
saw an acorn tree in the east, outside the sky. He looked on the north
side of the tree and saw some one hammering. He hurled a stone from
his sling, struck down the person, and sent Tilitchi to bring him.
Tilitchi brought him.

"Of what people is this one?" asked he of the old women.

"He is of a good people," answered they. "Put him on the central
pillar of the sweat-house; we call him Tsurat."

Tsurat was only stunned. When Tsurat was taken to the central pillar,
he climbed it, stopping every little while and hammering. The sound
which he made, "Ya-tuck! ya-tuck!" was heard outside the
sweat-house,--a good sound; all liked to hear it.

Olelbis saw on the same tree another of the same family. When he was
brought, the old women said, "This is Min Taitai; put him on the
ground east of the fire"--the fire was in the middle.

Min Taitai began to talk to himself. They could hear two words, "Wit,
wit!" (coming back, coming back).

Olelbis stunned a third person, who was brought by Tilitchi. The old
women said, "He, too, is of a good people, he is Hessiha; let him be
with Min Taitai, and put a basket of red earth and water near them."

Min Taitai talked on to himself, "Wit, wit!"

"Who is 'Wit, wit?'" asked Hessiha.

"Sas" (the sun), answered Min Taitai, "was going down, and now he is
coming back; that is who 'Wit, wit' is."

"Who is coming back?" asked Hessiha.

"Sas is coming back."

"Sas is not coming back, he is going on."

(In winter Sas goes down south, and in summer he comes back north. Min
Taitai was saying Sas is coming back, up north. Hessiha thought he was
saying Sas has gone down toward the west, and now is coming back east
without setting.)

"Wit, wit" (coming back, coming back), said Min Taitai.

"Cherep, cherep!" (going on, going on), said Hessiha.

Soon they came to blows, began to fight; when fighting, Hessiha took
red mud from the basket and threw it. Min Taitai took mud, too, and
threw it at Hessiha. Both were soon covered with mud and water.

Clover, beautiful grasses, and plants of all kinds were growing around
the sweat-house in Olelpanti. The whole place was a mass of blossoms.
"Now, my grandmothers," said Olelbis, "tell me what you think. All
that ground below us is bare; there is nothing on it. What can we do
for it?"

"My grandson, in a place southeast of this is a house in which people
live. The place is called Hlihli Pui Hlutton [acorn eastern
sweat-house place]. An old man lives there. Send Tsurat to bring that
old man to us."

"I will," said Olelbis; and he sent Tsurat, who brought Hlihli
Kiemila, who had lived all his life in that eastern sweat-house. When
Olelbis looked at the old man, he said to Tsurat: "Go to the world
beneath us with Hlihli. Carry him all over it,--north, south, east,
and west."

Hlihli was like an old worm-eaten acorn outside; inside he was like
meal or snuff, and when he moved this inside sifted out of him. He had
a daughter, Hlihli Loimis, and she had many sons.

Tsurat carried Hlihli all over the world, and when he had carried him
five days little oak bushes were springing up everywhere from the dust
which fell from him. They took seeds of clover growing around the
sweat-house in Olelpanti and scattered them; clover grew up in every
place. Olelbis threw down all kinds of flower seeds from the flowers
blossoming in Olelpanti.

A little way east of Olelbis's sweat-house lived Sedit. At the time of
the fire he ran through under the sky in the south and went up on the
sky to Olelpanti. He stayed there with Olelbis until the fire and
water stopped. Then he went east a short distance, and made a house
for himself. During the great water Sedit caught Wokwuk, and afterward
built a house near his own for him.

There was a big rock east of Sedit's house. Olelbis saw Chuluhl
sitting on this rock, and he said,--

"My brother, I have put clover on the earth. I want you to go down
there and stay with that clover, stay with it always. The place is a
good one for you." This place was Tokuston on Pui Mem. "Take this
pontcheuchi [headband made of dew], wear it around your head, wear it
always, guard the clover, put your head among its leaves, and keep the
grass and clover wet and green all the time. I will take that rock
from near Sedit's house, and put it down on the earth for you." (The
rock stands now about fifty miles above Paspuisono. It is called Pui
Toleson--rock leaning east.)

Wokwuk at the time of the great water lost the middle and longest
finger on one hand; it went far north, and after a time became a deer,
and from that deer came all the deer in the world after the fire.
When Kahit and Mem Loimis went east on the way home, Wokwuk lost a
small feather from above one of his eyes. It went west and was turned
into the beautiful shells tsanteris. He also lost two neck feathers.
They went west and became kalas, and from that came all pearl shells.
He lost the tip of his little finger. It went west and became the
Wokwuk bird down here. He lost some spittle. It went east on the water
and turned to blue beads, such as people wear now around their necks.
Wokwuk lost a small bit of his intestines. It went south on the water
and became mempak; from that come all mempak (water bone). He lost a
piece of his backbone. It went east on the water and became an elk,
and from that elk came all elks.

One day Sedit said to Olelbis, when all were telling Olelbis what they
were going to do: "Grandson, I am going to take off my skin and let it
go to the world below."

"Do so," said Olelbis.

Sedit took off his skin as he would a coat, and threw it down to this
world.

"Now there will be Sedits all over down there," said he.

While Olelbis was gathering into Olelpanti all the people from every
place outside this sky above us, Min Taitai and Hessiha were disputing
and throwing red mud at each other.

Olelbis gathered people from every side till he had gathered them all
at his house. They were there in crowds and in thousands, singing and
talking inside and outside, everywhere in Olelpanti.

One morning Olelbis said to the old women,--

"My grandmothers, I cannot tell what to do nor how to get what I want,
but far west of here is a ridge that stretches from the south to the
north, and on that ridge people of some kind come from the south and
hurry north; they do that every day; they go north along that ridge,
and I do not know what kind of people they are. When they are on the
top of the ridge, they run north very swiftly. As soon as Klabus and
Yilahl finished the level ground and the hills and mountains in the
world below, these people began to travel along the ridge in this way,
and they have been going north ever since."

"You do not know those people," said the old women, "but we know them,
the Katkatchila brothers know them; they are Kahsuku, the cloud dogs,
the cloud people. If you wish to know more about these cloud people,
ask the elder Katkatchila; he knows them; he lives far west at this
time; go and ask him, go yourself."

Olelbis set out next morning early, and just before he reached
Katkatchila's house in the west he came upon some one who was stooping
and looking toward the south. It was the elder Katkatchila, who was
watching the cloud people.

"Stop, my brother," said Katkatchila, "and watch with me."

The two looked along the ridge toward the south--it was before sunrise
then--and they saw a person come a little way in sight, then turn and
go back. He did not come nearer because he saw Olelbis. The cloud
people are very timid; they can see a long distance, and have a very
keen scent. When he saw Olelbis, this one ran away home.

"My brother," said Katkatchila to Olelbis, "we have been watching here
to drive back these cloud people. We have watched night and day, I and
my little brother. My brother is near the eastern slope of this ridge
which runs north and south; he stays there and watches."

"What do you mean by cloud people?" asked Olelbis; "what kind of
people are they? I have seen only the head and neck of one; what I saw
looked well, seemed good. I wish you, my brothers, would catch one of
these people, if you can."

"How is it that you do not know these people?" asked Katkatchila. "You
ought to know them; you have seen every place, every person,
everything; you ought to know these people. I will tell you how they
came. My sister and I made the great world fire; we made the wakpohas
because Torihas and his people stole my flint. I was angry. I told my
sister to put her baby outside the house. We put pitch-pine around it,
and fire blazed up from the baby. When the fire was burning all over
the earth and there were great flames and smoke, a big water and a
strong wind came; the water filled the whole world with steam, and the
wind drove the steam and smoke from the great fire, and carried them
far off to the south, where they became a people,--the cloud people.
These people are red or white or black, all of them, and they are
going north always. They have good heads and long necks."

"I should like to stand near some of these people and look at them,"
said Olelbis.

"I do not like to see them go north," said Katkatchila. "My brother
and I are here trying to drive them back; but they go north in spite
of us. My brother is on the other slope over there to frighten them
back; but they turn to the east a little and go around him."

"Bring your brother here," said Olelbis.

Katkatchila brought his brother, and the two said,--

"These cloud people are very wild; we cannot go near them. But we
should like to drive them back or catch them."

"Go west, my brothers," said Olelbis, "and get something to stop that
gap on the east where the cloud people pass you and go north. Stop
that opening on the east, and stop the western slope also, leaving
only a narrow place for them to go through. Get yew wood, make a very
high fence with it, and stop the eastern slope."

They brought the yew wood and made a very high fence on the eastern
slope, and then one on the west, leaving only a narrow gap open.

"Go to the east now," said Olelbis, "get katsau, which is a strong,
fibrous plant, and make strings of it. Make a rope of the string and
set a snare in the opening of the fence across the western slope to
catch those cloud people."

The elder brother was on the ridge near the western slope, and the
younger on the ridge near the eastern slope. The brothers made the
snare and set it on the western slope. Both watched and waited for the
clouds to come.

"Now, my brother," said Olelbis, when he saw this work, "watch these
people well, frighten them into the trap, and I will go back to
Olelpanti."

Next morning early the two brothers were watching, and very soon they
saw a great many cloud people coming. Both brothers were lying flat on
the middle of the ridge, so that the clouds could not see them. The
clouds watched closely. They came to the place where they had always
turned east to go past little Katkatchila; they ran against the fence
and could not pass. They turned and went toward the west to pass
northward along the central ridge; but when both brothers stood up,
the clouds rushed to the western slope and fell into the trap.

Olelbis saw this and said: "Now, my brothers are driving them in. I
must go and see!" And he ran off quickly.

"Oh, my brother," said the Katkatchilas when he came, "we have caught
one cloud. All the rest went through the fence. They broke it--we
caught one; the others burst away."

Olelbis looked at the cloud and said,--

"This is a black one! They broke down the fence and ran away! They are
a strong people."

"Now, my brother," said the elder Katkatchila, "we will skin this
cloud, and you may have the skin. We will give it to you."

"I shall be glad to have it," said Olelbis.

They stripped the skin from the cloud, and, when giving it to Olelbis,
the elder one said, "You must tan this carefully."

"Make another fence," said Olelbis, "but make it stronger. You will
catch more of these people."

"A great many clouds have broken through our fence to-day and gone
north. Others went before we made the fence. We shall see these people
by and by," said Katkatchila. (He meant that clouds would stay in the
north and become another people; stay there always.)

Olelbis took the skin, turned toward home, and travelled on. He was
rubbing it in his hands, tanning it as he went. The brothers put the
body in a hole and buried it, not caring for the flesh. They wanted
only the skin.

Olelbis went along tanning the skin of the black cloud, and he walked
around everywhere as he tanned. He went away west, then north, then
south, then east. At last he came home with the skin well tanned. He
spread it and stretched it smooth. The two Katkatchila brothers had
not been able yet to catch another of the cloud people, but they were
working at it all the time. After Olelbis spread the skin on the
ground, he took it up and said to one of the old women,--

"My grandmother is always cold; let us give her this skin;" and he
gave it to her. Each of the two old women said,--

"My grandson, we are glad to have this skin. We shall sleep warm now."

"I must go," said Olelbis, "and see my brothers drive in more of the
cloud people." And he went.

"We cannot catch these clouds," said the older brother; "they go
through our fence, they escape, we cannot catch them; they have gone
to the north, they will stay there and become a new people. We have
caught only one, a white cloud. Those that have escaped will become a
new people; they will be Yola Ka" (snow clouds).

The Katkatchilas stripped the skin from the white cloud and gave it to
Olelbis. He went around north, south, east, and west, tanning it in
the same way that he had tanned the black skin. After he had tanned it
well he spread the skin, stretched it, straightened it; then he gave
it to the other grandmother.

Both old women were glad now. Both said: "We shall sleep warm at night
now all the time."

Next day the two brothers caught a third cloud, a red one, but they
kept that skin for themselves. They did not give it to Olelbis,
because he told them to keep it. We see this skin now often enough,
for the brothers hang it up when they like in the west and sometimes
in the east.

"Now," said the two old women, "we have this white skin and this black
one. When we hang the white skin outside this house, white clouds will
go from it,--will go away down south, where its people began to live,
and then they will come from the south and travel north to bring rain.
When they come back, we will hang out the black skin, and from it a
great many black rain clouds will go out, and from these clouds heavy
rain will fall on all the world below."

From that time the old women hang out the two skins, first the white,
then the black skin, and when clouds enough have gone from them they
take the skins into the sweat-house again; and from these two skins
comes all the rain to people in this world.

"The cloud people who went north will stay in the northwest," said
Olelbis, "and from them will come snow to people hereafter."

All this time the people in Olelpanti were singing and talking. Any
one could hear them from a distance. Olelbis had brought in a great
many different kinds of people, others had come themselves, and still
others were coming. After the tanning of the two cloud skins a man
came and took his place above the sweat-house door, and sat there with
his face to the east. This was Kar Kiemila. Right after him came
Tsararok, and took his place at the side of Kar. Next came Kau; then
the two brothers Hus came, and Wehl Dilidili. All these people in the
sweat-house and around it asked one another,--

"What shall we do? Where shall we live? We should like to know what
Olelbis will do with us."

"You will know very soon where we are going," said Toko and Sula.
"Olelbis will put us in our places; he is chief over all."

Next morning Olelbis said: "Now, my grandmothers, what do you think
best? What are we to do with the people here? Is it best for them to
stay in Olelpanti?"

"Our grandson," answered the old women, "send all that are not needed
here to the lower world; turn them into something good for the people
who are to come soon,--those fit for this place up here. The great
people, the best ones, you will keep in Olelpanti, and send down only
a little part of each of them to turn into something in the world
below and be of use to people there."

Olelbis called all who were in the sweat-house to come out, and he
began to send them to their places.

To Kar he said: "Go and live on Wini Mem. Be a gray heron there; that
is a good country for you." (Before white people came there were many
of these birds on that river.)

To Toko he said: "Go to Kawiken on Pui Mem. Be a sunfish and live
there always. You, Sula, go to the south of Bohem Puyuk on Wini Mem.
Be a trout, and live at Sulanharas."

To Torihas he said: "You will be a blue crane," and to Chalilak: "You
will be a goose. You both will have two places to live in, one in the
south and the other in the north. You will go north in the spring and
live there all summer; you will go south in the fall and live in the
south all winter. Do this always; travel that way every year."

To Kiriu he said: "Go and live along the water. You will be a loon,
and you will go up and down great rivers all your life."

To Katsi he said: "You will be a fish hawk, catch fish and eat them,
live along rivers."

Olelbis plucked one small feather from the neck of Moihas. This he
threw down and said, "Be an eagle, and live on high mountains." All
bald eagles on earth came from that feather, but the great Moihas
remained above with Olelbis, where he is now.

From Lutchi Olelbis plucked one feather, threw it down, and said: "You
will be a humming-bird. Fly around in spring when the green grass
comes and the trees and flowers bloom. You will be on blossoms and
dart from one to another everywhere." Lutchi himself stayed in
Olelpanti.

Olelbis pulled a feather from Kau, threw it down, and said: "You will
fly along rivers, be a white crane, and live near them always." The
great Kau stayed in Olelpanti with Olelbis.

From the elder Hus brother Olelbis plucked a feather from the right
side, sent the feather down on this earth, and said,--

"You be a buzzard down there, and in spring go up on Wini Mem and look
for dead salmon and other fish along Pui Mem, Bohema Mem, and other
rivers, eat dead salmon and other fish. When people kill a snake or
something else which they do not like, you will go and eat the snake
or other dead thing. The Wintu, the coming people, will feed you
always with what is dead."

Tilitchi had been sent for three persons, and now he brought the
first.

"Who is this?" asked Olelbis of the old women.

"This is Dokos," said they; "he is bad."

Dokos was placed a little northeast of the sweat-house. He sat looking
toward the west. Tilichi brought in a second and third person.

"Who are these?" asked Olelbis.

"These are both bad people," said the old women. "These are Wima
Loimis and Klak Loimis."

"Put them with Dokos," said Olelbis. After he had called all the
people out of the sweat-house to send them to their proper places,
Olelbis had put something on their teeth to make them harmless.

"Come here, Wima Loimis," said Olelbis. "I have something to put on
your teeth so that they may harm no one."

"I want nothing on my teeth," said Wima Loimis. "If something were put
on them I could not eat." He asked again, but she shook her head,
saying: "I want nothing on my teeth, I could not eat if anything were
put on them."

"If she will not come, come you, Klak Loimis." Klak Loimis would not
go to him.

"Why not come when I call you?" asked Olelbis.

"My sister Wima will not go. She says that she could not eat if her
teeth were touched. I want nothing on my teeth. I am afraid that I
could not eat."

"Very well," answered Olelbis, "you, Wima, and you, Klak, want to be
different from others. Come, Dokos, I will touch your teeth."

"My sisters, Klak and Wima, want nothing on their teeth. I want
nothing on mine. I am angry at my sisters; my heart hates them. I do
not wish to be good. I am angry at my sisters. I will be wicked as
well as they." Then turning to his sisters he said: "After a while
people will employ me against you whenever they are angry at you.
Whenever you bite people or hurt them, they will call me to fight
against you, and I will go with them. I will go into your bodies and
kill you. Then you will be sorry for what you have done to-day.
Olelbis asked you to be good. He wants you to be good, but you are not
willing. I will be bad to punish you."

When the two women heard these words they cried, and Wima said, "Well,
my brother, we can put something on our teeth yet."

Dokos placed his head between his hands and sat awhile in that
posture. Then he straightened himself and said,--

"You two have talked enough; you would better stop. You are not like
me; I am stronger than both of you, and I shall be so always. You,
Wima, and you, Klak, will hate people only, but I shall hate all
living things. I shall hate you, hate every one; kill you, kill every
one. I want nothing of any one. I want no friend in any place."

"Well," said Olelbis, "you go as you are."

"I will go first," said Dokos.

"Go," said Olelbis, "to Koiham Nomdaltopi, be flint there, and spread
all around the place. You, Klak Loimis, will go to Klak Kewilton, be a
rattlesnake there, increase and spread everywhere. I will send you,
Wima, to Wima Wai Tsarauton; you will be a grizzly bear there. After a
while a great family will come from you and spread over all the
country. You will be bad; and, Klak, you will be bad, but, Dokos, you
will be the worst, always ready to hurt and kill; always angry, always
hating your sisters and every one living.

"You, Klak, and you, Wima, when you see people you will bite them, and
people will take Dokos to kill you, and Dokos will go into your
bodies, and you will die. Wima, you will be sorry that you would not
let me change your teeth. You, Klak, will be sorry. You will bite
people, and they will kill you because you cannot run away from them.
Your dead body will lie on the ground, and buzzards will eat it.

"Dokos, you will go to your place and increase. People will go there
and get you to kill your sisters and others for them, and when you
have pleased them and killed all the people they wished you to kill,
when they want you no longer, they will throw you down on a rock and
break you to pieces, then you will be nothing. You will be dead
forever. Now go!"

To all those who let their teeth be made innocent, Olelbis said: "You
will go to where I send you,--one here, another there." And he gave
their places to all. To some he said: "After a while the new people
will use you for food," and to the others he said: "The new people
will use your skins, and you will be of service to them, you will be
good for them."

The first person taken up to Olelbis's sweat-house was Tsurat; and now
Olelbis spoke to Tsurat last of all and said,--

"Pluck one feather from your back."

Tsurat plucked it.

Olelbis threw the feather to the earth and said,--

"The place where this falls will be called Tsurat-ton Mem Puisono.
This feather will become woodpeckers, and their place will be there.
Their red feathers will be beautiful, and every one will like their
red scalps and will use them for headbands. The woodpeckers will be
also called Topi chilchihl" (bead birds).

All people that were good on this earth only, of use only here,
Olelbis sent down to be beasts, birds, and other creatures. The
powerful and great people that were good in Olelpanti and useful there
he kept with himself, and sent only a feather or a part of each to
become something useful down here. The good people themselves, the
great ones, stayed above, where they are with Olelbis now.




OLELBIS AND MEM LOIMIS


One character in this myth is of great importance in actual Indian
belief, the Hlahi or doctor, the sorcerer. The position and power of
the Hlahi are explained at length in the notes to this volume. Sanihas
Yupchi, the archer of Daylight, is Tsaroki Sakahl, the messenger sent
by Torihas to invite Katkatchila to hunt; he appears also as the
friend and messenger of Waida Dikit, who assembled the world concert
in which Hawt proved the greatest musician.


PERSONAGES

After each name is given that of the beast, bird, or thing into which
the personage was changed subsequently.

=Hubit=, wasp; =Hus=, buzzard; =Kahit=, wind; =Kaisus=, gray squirrel;
=Kiriú=, loon; =Kopus=, small-horned owl; =Kuntihlé=, small hawk
fishes in muddy water; =Kut=, unknown; =Lutchi=, humming-bird; =Mem
Loimis=, water; =Móihas=, bald eagle; =Pákchuso=, the pakchu stone;
=Patkilis=, jack rabbit; =Pori Kipánamas=, another name for =Kopus
Sútunut=, black eagle; =Sánihas=, daylight; =Sotchet=, beaver; =Toko=,
sunfish; =Tsaroki Sakahl=, green snake; =Tsárorok=, fish-hawk;
=Tsudi=, mouse; =Tsurat=, red-headed woodpecker; =Winishuyat=,
foresight; =Wokwuk=, unknown.

       *       *       *       *       *

One evening a woman came to Olelpanti. Her name was Mem Loimis.

"Why are you here?" inquired Olelbis; "and from what place have you
come?"

"I have come from my home in the earth to ask if I may live with you.
I have come from the north."

"You may live here," said Olelbis; and she stayed there. She lived
with Olelbis, became his wife, and had two sons: the first was Wokwuk,
the second Kut.

Kut was still small, when one day the woman went out a little to one
side of the house to get something, and a man came to her and said,
"Come with me--come right away!" And he took her, took her quickly,
took her toward the north, to the place where Kahi Hlut is. This man
was Kahit, and Kahi Hlut was his house.

Olelbis knew not where his wife had gone; he knew not which way she
went; he had not seen her going out and had not seen her afterward. He
inquired of every one who lived in Olelpanti. All they knew was that
she had gone west a little way to get something.

For five years after the woman was carried away the people in
Olelpanti had no water to drink. This woman had given them water, and
now some one had taken her, and without her there was no water.

"I cannot tell what to do without water," said Olelbis. "I don't think
my children can live without water. I don't know what yapaitu likes my
wife and has taken her."

The people in and around Olelpanti talked a great deal about Mem
Loimis.

"I don't know how we are to live now," said Toko Kiemila to Olelbis.
"Some one has taken your wife away. I cannot live without water much
longer."

Another man who lay inside the sweat-house at the west end, an old
man, stood up and said,--

"I do not know what people are to do without water. I do not know how
you, Olelbis, are to live without it. I cannot live unless I have
water. I am very dry. Why do you not try to get water again? There is
a man in Hlihli Pui Hlutton whose name is Kopus. You can see his house
from here. He is a great Hlahi. He sings and dances every night. Let
him come here to sing and dance. Perhaps he will be able to bring
water back to us."

The old man who said this was Hubit. He was suffering from thirst so
much that he had tied a belt of sinews around his waist and tightened
it till he was nearly cut in two.

Olelbis went to the top of the sweat-house and spoke to all the
people.

"We must send for this Hlahi," said he. "Let him come here to sing and
bring water back to us. Some of you young men who walk fast must go
for him to-morrow."

That night they talked about the person who should go. One said to a
second, "You walk fast; you ought to go."

"I do not," said the second; "but you walk fast. You are the person to
go."

And so they spoke one after another, till at last Lutchi said, "I
cannot walk fast, but I will go."

Early next morning he went out to the top of the sweat-house and said,
"I am going!" and he shot away to the southeast.

He found the old Hlahi. He had not finished his night's work yet. This
Hlahi was Kopus Kiemila.

"Old man, you must stop awhile," said Lutchi. "Olelbis lost his wife,
Mem Loimis, years ago. He has two children, and he and all the people
are very dry; they are thirsting, they are dying for want of water. He
wants you to come and see if you can tell us what to do to bring water
back to Olelpanti. Olelbis will give you five sacks of acorns for your
pay. You must sing five nights for these five sacks. They are old
acorns."

"I will do that," said Kopus. "I will go with you."

Lutchi returned to Olelpanti with Kopus, who was called also Pori
Kipanamas, which means a man wearing a headband of fresh oak leaves
with two green acorns thrust in on each side. His face was painted
with acorn mould. A great many people were waiting there, all very
dry, very thirsty,--all hoping for water.

"I sent for you to come," said Olelbis, "and you must hlaha[2] five
nights. All my people, all my children, are dry. I am dry myself. I
lost my wife five years ago. I don't know where she went, and we have
no water since she left us. I want you to sing and to dance. I want
you to find out where my wife is."

    [2] Hlaha means, "to perform as a Hlahi, or doctor."

When night came, Olelbis gave a pipe filled with tobacco to Kopus and
said, "Now you must hlaha."

Kopus smoked, became tunindili,--that is, possessed. A Tsudi yapaitu
came to him and began to chant. The yapaitu, speaking through Kopus,
said,--

"I have looked all around the world, I have looked everywhere; every
smell has come to my nose, every sight to my eyes, every sound to my
ears, but to-night nothing comes to me. I cannot see, I cannot hear, I
cannot smell." And he stopped.

"I am going to dance the spirit dance," said Kopus. "Who will sing for
me?"

"Let these two Tsudi girls sing," said Olelbis.

Hubit was lying on the east side of the sweat-house, and he said,--

"Make haste, you two girls, and sing for that Hlahi. I am nearly dead,
almost cut in two, I am so dry."

He had tightened his belt a little that evening. Kopus danced all
night, and the two girls sang for him.

"I have not found out which way that woman went," said he, next
morning.

He danced five days and nights, and then said: "I can tell nothing. I
know nothing about this woman, Mem Loimis."

Every bola heris[3] that was lying inside the sweat-house was terribly
thirsty. One old man got up and said,--

    [3] Bola means "to tell one of the creation myths;" bolas means
    "one of the myths;" bola heris is an actor in any of them, a
    personage mentioned or described in a creation myth.

"What kind of a Hlahi have you here? What kind of a Hlahi is Kopus? He
is here five days and nights and can tell nothing, knows nothing. If
you wish to learn something, bring a Hlahi who has knowledge of
water."

"This old Kopus knows nothing of water," said Toko. "Old Kopus is a
good Hlahi for acorns and for the Tsudi and Kaisus people; that is all
he is good for. I know this Kopus well. Get a Hlahi who knows more
than he does."

"You bola herises tell us," said Olelbis, "who is a good Hlahi for
water, and we will get him. Look at my children; they are almost dying
of thirst. Tell us where their mother, Mem Loimis, is."

"Oh, daylight, come quickly; be here right away! I am almost cut in
two I am so dry. Oh, daylight, come quickly!" groaned Hubit.

No one mentioned another Hlahi. So Olelbis talked on,--

"All the people said that Kopus was a good Hlahi. That is why I got
him; but he is not a good Hlahi for water. Now we will get Sanihas
Yupchi, the archer of daylight, who lives in the farthest east, he is
the son of Sanihas. He is small, but he is a great Hlahi. Lutchi, you
must go now for Sanihas Yupchi. Here are one hundred yellowhammer-wing
arrows for him, all red, and many others."

Lutchi went to the east end of the sweat-house, danced a little,
sprang onto the sweat-house, danced a little more, and then whizzed
away through the air. Lutchi travelled all day and all night, reached
the place about daylight next morning, and said to Sanihas,--

"Olelbis sent me here to ask your son to come and hlaha for him. He
sends you all these five hundred arrows made of kewit reed and one
hundred yellowhammer-wing arrows to come and hlaha."

"You must go," said Sanihas to her son, "and I will follow you.
Olelbis is a yapaitu himself; he ought to know where that woman
is,--he thinks that he knows everything; but you go and hlaha, and
hear what your yapaitu tells you."

Sanihas Yupchi started, and was at the sweat-house in Olelpanti next
morning just as the sun was rising. He went into the sweat-house, and
Olelbis gave him many things.

"Give me tobacco," said Sanihas Yupchi. "I am going to hlaha."

Olelbis gave him a pipe with tobacco; he smoked it out and was not
possessed. Olelbis gave him another pipeful, and he smoked it out, but
was not possessed. He smoked out ten pipefuls, and then people said,--

"I am afraid that the yapaitu will not come to him."

He smoked twenty more pipefuls, still he was not possessed; then
twenty more, did not hlaha.

"He is no Hlahi," cried people on all sides; "if he were, the yapaitu
would have come to him long ago."

"The yapaitu he is waiting for does not live near this sweat-house; he
is very far away," said Toko. "Give him more tobacco."

They gave him five pipefuls, then four, then one more,--sixty in all;
after that a yapaitu came to him.

"The yapaitu has come," said Olelbis. "I want you to look everywhere
and learn all you can; my children are nearly dead from lack of water;
you must tell where Mem Loimis is."

Sanihas Yupchi began to sing, and he said, "I will have the spirit
dance to-night; the two Tsudi girls may sing for me."

He danced twenty nights and days without saying a word,--danced twenty
days and nights more. The two Tsudi girls sang all the time. Then
Sanihas Yupchi sat down, said nothing; he had found out nothing.

Again he danced five days and nights, then four days and nights, then
one day and one night more. After that he sat down and said,--

"I am going to speak. The place of which I am going to tell is a long
way from here, but I am going to talk and let you hear what I say. Did
any one see which way this woman Mem Loimis went?"

One person answered: "She went west a short distance to get something.
That was the last seen of her."

"Was anything the matter with that woman?" asked Sanihas Yupchi. "Does
any one know?"

"Yes," said Olelbis, "she was with child."

"Well, while she was out, a man came to her and took her away with
him, took her far north and then east beyond the first Kolchiken Topi,
where the sky comes down, where the horizon is; he took her to the
place where he lives, and he lives in Waiti Kahi Pui Hlut. His name is
Kahit, and after he took her home they lived pleasantly together till
her child was born. Kahit did not claim that child as his. After a
while Mem Loimis grew angry at Kahit, left her child with him, and
went eastward, went to the other side of the second horizon. She
stayed there awhile, and gave birth to two sons, children of Kahit.
Then she went farther east to a third horizon, went to the other side
of that, stayed there, is living there now. The boy that was born when
she lived with Kahit was Sotchet. Sotchet's father was Olelbis. When
the child grew up a little, Kahit said to him: 'Your father lives in
Olelpanti.'"

Sanihas Yupchi told all this, and said to Wokwuk and Kut, the two sons
of Olelbis,--

"Your mother has gone a long way from here. Mem Loimis is far from
you. She is very far east. If I were at home, I could go to her
quickly, but I am here. Now you must go and see your mother. In the
far east you have two brothers, Kahit's sons. When you have passed
three Kolchiken Topis, three horizons, you will see them, and they
will know you. The way to your mother and brothers is long. That is
what my yapaitu says to me--my yapaitu is the Winishuyat of Patkilis."

Sanihas Yupchi was Tsaroki Sakahl, a great person.

Wokwuk and Kut, the two sons of Olelbis by Mem Loimis, went away east.
Patkilis's Winishuyat, the yapaitu of Sanihas Yupchi, said that he
would go and help them till they had passed the second horizon. They
did not see him. He was invisible.

They travelled one day, came to the first horizon, and passed that;
then travelled a second day, reached the second horizon, and passed
that. The yapaitu, Patkilis's Winishuyat, told them then how to pass
the third horizon, and, having given every useful direction, went back
to Sanihas Yupchi.

Sanihas Yupchi was waiting all this time in Olelpanti. Olelbis's elder
son, Wokwuk, had tied the hair on top of his head with a young
grapevine and thrust a chirtchihas bone through it--his father had
given him this bone at starting. With this bone he was to raise the
sky. He put it under the edge of the sky and raised it. When he and
his brother had passed through, the sky came down with a terrible
noise. When they had passed the third sky, they could see far east.
Everything was nice there and looked clear, just as it does here at
daylight when all is bright and beautiful. After going a short
distance they saw two boys coming toward them. Soon the four met.

"Hello, brothers!" called out the other two.

"Who are you?" asked Wokwuk. "How do you know that we are your
brothers?"

"We know because our mother talks about you always. She told us this
morning that we must go out and play to-day. 'Perhaps you will see
your brothers,' said she to us; 'perhaps they will come, we do not
know.' You have come, and now we will go to our mother."

When they reached the house, on the third evening, the two sons of
Olelbis stood by the door while Kahit's two sons ran in and said:
"Mother, our brothers have come!"

Mem Loimis was lying at the east end of the house. She was lying on a
mem terek, water buckskin; her blanket was a mem nikahl, a water
blanket.

"Well, tell them to come in."

The brothers went in. Mem Loimis rose and said,--

"Oh, my sons, I think of you always. I live far away from where you
do, and you have travelled a long road to find me." She spread the mem
terek on the ground, and said: "Sit down here and rest."

"My mother," said the elder son of Olelbis, "my brother is very dry.
We have had no water in Olelpanti for many years. Did you think that
we could live without water?"

"I could not help your loss. What could I do?" said Mem Loimis. "I was
stolen away and carried far north, and from there I came to this
place; but your father is my husband. He knows everything; he can make
anything, do anything, see everything, but he did not know that I was
here. You shall have water, my children; water in plenty."

She held a basket to her breast then and took water from it, as a
nursing mother would take milk, filled the basket, and gave it to the
boys. She gave them plenty to eat, too, and said,--

"You boys are all my children. You are sons of Mem Loimis. I am here
now; but if there should be disturbance, if trouble were to rise, my
husband Kahit would come and take me away. He told me so. Some day my
husband Olelbis will know his son in the north who is living with
Kahit. Some day my husband Olelbis will think of me; he may want me to
come to him, he may wish to see me."

Wokwuk and Kut stayed five days with their mother, then one day, and
after that one day more. Sanihas Yupchi, who was dancing and chanting
in Olelpanti continually, said after the boys had gone:

"Get me a suhi kilo" (a striped basket).

Olelbis got him the suhi kilo, a little basket about two inches
around, and very small inside. Sanihas Yupchi put it in the middle of
the sweat-house. Nine days more passed, and Sanihas Yupchi was dancing
all the time.

That morning Mem Loimis said to Kut, the youngest son of Olelbis,--

"Your uncle Mem Hui, an old man, who lives at the first horizon west
of Olelpanti, is dry. He is thirsting for water. Take water to him.
Your elder brother will stay here with me while you are gone."

Sanihas Yupchi had danced fifty-nine days. On the sixtieth evening Mem
Loimis gave Kut a basketful of water for his uncle in the west.

"Go," said she, "straight west to where the old man lives. When you
have reached Mem Hui with the water, I will go and see my son Sotchet
in the north. I hear him cry all the time. He is dry. I will carry him
water."

She gave Kut, in a net bag before he started, ten gambling sticks cut
from grapevine. She tied the bag around his neck, and said,--

"Son of Mem Loimis, you will be a bola heris; you will be a great
gambler."

Kut was a very quick traveller, and could go in one night as far as
his brother in many nights and days. He started. There were holes in
the bottom of the basket, and as he went over the sky, high above the
top of Olelpanti Hlut, the water dropped and dropped through the holes
in the basket, and just before morning one drop fell from the basket
which Kut was carrying, and dropped into the basket which Sanihas
Yupchi had placed in the middle of the sweat-house at Olelpanti.

No one saw the water come, but in the morning the little basket was
full; the one drop filled it.

"Now," said Sanihas Yupchi, "I have worked as Hlahi all this time, and
that drop of water is all that I can get. You see it in the basket."

The little basket in Olelbis's house that the one drop filled stood
there, and Olelbis said,--

"Now you are dry, all you people in this sweat-house. You are thirsty,
you are anxious for water. Here is one drop of water. We do not know
who will drink first; but there is an old man on the west side of the
sweat-house crying all the time, crying night and day, for water. Let
him come and look at it." He meant Hubit.

Hubit stood up, came, looked at the basket and said: "What good is
this to me? There is only a drop there. It will do me no good."

"Drink what there is; you talk so much about water," replied all the
others, "that you would better drink."

"That drop can do no good to any one."

"Well, take a taste, anyhow," said Olelbis; "it will not hurt you."

"I don't want a taste, I want a drink," answered Hubit.

"Take a drink, then," said Olelbis.

Hubit began to drink. He drank and drank, took his belt off about the
middle of the forenoon, put his head on the edge of the basket and
drank from morning till midday, drank till two men had to carry him
away from the water and lay him down at the upper end of the
sweat-house.

Though Hubit drank half a day, the water in the basket was no less.

Kiriu Herit drank next. He drank long, but did not lower the water.
After him Sutunut drank till he was satisfied; then Moihas drank all
he wanted.

"Let all come and drink. When each has enough, let him stand aside,"
said Olelbis.

Tsararok drank, and then Kuntihle drank; then Hus and Tsurat; after
them the old women, Pakchuso Pokaila, the grandmothers of Olelbis,
drank; then Toko; then Kopus drank. But the people murmured, saying,--

"Kopus is no Hlahi; he ought not to have any of our water. He is only
good for acorns."

The two Tsudi girls, who had sung so long, drank very heartily.

Lutchi lived outside, east of the sweat-house; they called him to
drink. He took one sip and went out. Lutchi never liked water.

Now Sanihas Yupchi, who had brought the water, drank of it; and last
of all, Olelbis.

When all were satisfied, and Toko had gone back and lain down in his
place north of the sweat-house, the basket was put near him; and ever
after Toko had water in abundance, and so had every one.

There was plenty of water ever after in Olelpanti for all uses; but if
Sanihas Yupchi had not brought it, all might have perished for want of
water.

"I will go home now," said Sanihas Yupchi, after he had drunk. He
wished well to every one and went away.

When Kut was carrying the basket westward, every drop that fell made a
spring,--wherever a drop fell a spring appeared.




NORWAN


This myth, which recalls the Helen of Troy tale, is extremely
interesting both as regards personages and structure. At present I
shall make but few remarks, and those relating only to personages.
Hluyuk Tikimit, quivering porcupine, known here as Norwan, is the
cause of the first war in the world. The porcupine in American
mythology is always connected with sunlight, so far as my researches
go, and Norwan is connected with daylight, for she dances all day,
never stops while there is light. Her title of Bastepomas,
food-giving, is also significant, and would help to show that she is
that warm, dancing air which we see close to the earth in fine
weather, and which is requisite for plant growth. We have another
"light" person in this myth, Sanihas, who is light in a generic sense,
daylight generally and everywhere. The root Sa in Sanihas is identical
with Sa in Sas, the Wintu word for "sun." Sa means "light" and Sas
"for light," _i. e._ for the purpose of giving light. Sanihas is the
light which is given.

In Bastepomas, the title given by Olelbis to Norwan, the first
syllable ba means "to eat," bas means "for to eat" or food, tep means
"to give," and tepomas "she who gives;" the whole word means "she who
gives food."

Chulup Win Herit, the great chief, the white, pointed stone who lives
on the bed of the great eastern water, the ocean, the husband of
Sanihas, has a counterpart in Tithonos, the husband of Eos or Aurora,
in classic mythology. Both had beautiful wives, and were visited by
them nightly in the bed of the ocean. Chulup's tragedy is somewhat
greater, for he is caught by Wai Karili and pounded into bits near the
present Mt. Shasta, while Tithonos is only changed into a cricket.
Eos, the Latin Aurora, was considered as the whole day by most poets,
and Sanihas in Wintu mythology is the whole day, all the light that
Sas gives.

There was a reason why Norwan preferred Tede Wiu to Norbis, but we can
only infer it at present. The present Wiu bird is brown, and has no
significance in this connection, but there was a red Wiu, the bird
into which the Tede Wiu who fought with Norbis was changed. That he
was a person who might be preferred by Norwan, herself a special form
of light, is evident when we consider the immense importance in
European tradition of the robin-redbreast and of the red-headed
woodpecker among Indians.

That Norwan, food-giving light on the earth, was worth fighting for,
is evident.


PERSONAGES

After each name is given that of the beast, bird, or thing into which
the personage was changed subsequently.

=Bisus=, mink; =Boki=, sturgeon; =Búlibok=, a small nighthawk; =Chali
Dokos=, obsidian; =Chati Wai Halina=, pine-nut bug; =Chir Chuma=,
sucker; =Cho=, blackbird; =Chuchu=, dog; =Chulup Win=, a pointed rock;
=Chutuhl=, a small bird that goes in flocks; =Dokos=, flint; =Dokos
Hilit=, flint fly; =Hamam=, the longest black feather in the tail of
the black vulture; =Hau=, red fox; =Hawt=, eel; =Héssiha=, tomtit;
=Hlihli=, acorn; =Hluyuk Tikimit=, quivering porcupine; =Ho=, polecat;
=Hokohas=, mud turtle; =Hus=, turkey buzzard; =Kahi Buli Pokaila=,
wind mountain old woman; =Kahit=, wind; =Kaisus=, gray squirrel;
=Kar=, blue heron; =Karili=, coon; =Katsi=, chicken hawk; =Kaukau=,
white heron; =Kawas=, basket; =Keli=, flint from which knives are
made; =Kichi Not=, a kind of arrow; =Kíchuna=, a small bird that
frequents rocks; =Kilichepis=, ----; =Kiri Hubit=, a kind of wasp;
=Kobalus=, a shell; =Koip=, a small bird which calls "koip"; =Kopus=,
a small night-owl; =Kot=, diver; =Kóyumus=, a flint of mixed colors;
=Kukupiwit=, crooked breast; =Nomdal Lenas=, streaks in the west;
=Nomel Hiwili=, a bird with white-tipped wings which comes down with a
buzz very quickly; =Nom Sowiwi=, ----; =Nom Toposloni=, west fir bark;
=Norbis=, dwelling or sitting in the south; =Nórhara Chepmis=, heavy
south wind with rain; =Norpatsas=, southern fire sparks; =Norwan=,
----; =Notudui Ulumus=, he stoops and picks up stones; =Pai Homhoma=,
he buzzes in the manzanita; =Patkilis=, jack rabbit; =Puiké Tsumu=, a
deep red flint; =Saiai Not=, hollow arrow; =Saias=, white flint;
=Sánihas=, daylight; =Sau=, acorn bread; =Sawe=, mixed white and blue
flint; =Sedit=, coyote; =Séhinom Chábutu=, chicken hawk; =Serin
Dólite=, small bumble-bee; =Siriwit=, whirlwind; =Sútunut=, black
eagle; =Tede Wiu=, a small brown bird about as large as an English
sparrow; =Tenek Not=, a kind of arrow; =Tidok=, ant; =Tsánteris=, a
kind of shell; =Tsotso tokos=, a small very adhesive burr; =Tsudi=,
mouse; =Tsuini=, a kind of small fish; =Tubuk=, ----; =Tuichi kelis=,
feathered head net; =Wai Charatawa=, ----; =Waida Werris=, polar
star; =Wainom Yola=, northwestern snow; =Wai Hau=, northern red fox;
=Wai Not=, northern arrow; =Wik=, small night hawk; =Wai Karili=,
northern coon; =Wul Wuhl=, linnet; =Yípokus=, black fox.

       *       *       *       *       *

At a place east of Pas Puisono a woman came up out of the earth. Her
name was Hluyuk Tikimit. She had another name, Pom Norwanen Pitchen.
We call her also Norwan.

She appeared before the present Wintu people came out of the ground,
at Tsarau Heril.

"I am in this world now," said Norwan to herself. "I will look around
everywhere to see from what places people are coming."

She lived alone in her sweat-house, which was called Norwan Buli Hlut,
remained in the house and danced during daylight.

Olelbis looked down at this woman and said,--

"This is my sister, who has come up before the new people on earth. I
don't know what she will do yet."

When Olelbis was building his sweat-house in Olelpanti, he cut a piece
from a white-oak tree, and this piece rolled down outside the sky to
the lower world, where it became a people in Nor Puiken, in the
southeast, and that people were there before the present Wintus came
out of the ground at Tsarau Heril.

"My dear sister has come up before the Wintus, and will be with them
hereafter," said Olelbis. "I have not settled yet how her work is to
be, have not made her ready for it."

He put his hand toward the southeast then, and took yósoü (a plant
that has a red blossom). He gave this plant to Norwan, and said,--

"Take this, my sister, and when you dance use it as a staff. It will
have a blossom on the top which will be blooming always."

He reached southeast to the same place, took a small bird, plucked a
feather from each wing, gave the feathers to Norwan, and said,--

"My sister, thrust these through your hair, just above your forehead,
one on each side. These feathers will begin to sing in the morning
early; you will know by them at what time you must begin to dance."

He stretched his hand again to the southeast, and took buri luli,
which is a little red blossom that grows in spring on a plant about a
foot high. He gave the blossoms to Norwan and said,--

"Roll this in your hands, crush it, put the juice on your face, and
make your cheeks red."

Olelbis turned then to his grandmothers, who were standing near by,
and asked if they had acorns.

"We have," said they. "We have plenty."

Olelbis took a handful, gave them to his sister, and said,--

"When you shell these acorns, rub them between your palms and hold
your hands open; blow the dust which scatters; you will see it rise
high into the trees, and acorns will come on them."

It was on the first morning after she had come to Norwan Buli that
Olelbis gave Norwan the staff, feathers, blossoms, and acorns. On the
second morning very early the feathers began to sing; then flocks of
birds of their kind came flying toward the sweat-house, and Norwan
heard a voice far up in the sky calling to her, and saying,--

"My brother's daughter, you have come upon earth before the Wintu
people, and are dancing. When you dance you must not look toward the
west, nor the north, nor the south, but turn your face and look toward
Hlihli Pui Hlutton in the southeast, the place from which your staff
and your paint came."

While this man was talking, Norwan looked up and saw him sitting with
one leg crossed upon the other. He was holding a handful of white-oak
acorns in his hand, and was sitting over the door of the sweat-house
in Olelpanti. It was Kar Kiemila.

"Now, my brother," said Olelbis to Hessiha, who lived with him in
Olelpanti, "I think it is best for you to go down to our sister and
stay with her. Live with her always. When your feathers drop away or
are pulled off hereafter, they will become like you, and there will be
hessihas on the earth everywhere. Our sister will tell you what to do.
You will stay with her, never leave her. The people will call our
sister Bastepomas, because she is the food-giving woman. When you see
anything, let her know; when you hear anything, tell her; when you
want to do anything, ask leave of her."

Hessiha went down to live with his sister. Next day he saw a woman
coming from the east and going west. He told Norwan, and she said,--

"Watch which way she goes, my brother. Perhaps she will come to us
here."

He watched. She came straight to Norwan Buli.

"My younger sister," said she to Norwan, "I came out in the east, but
I don't like to live there. I have left that place, and am going far
away to the west. In the evening look westward, a little after sunset,
you will see a red, yellow, and white person, Nomdal Lenas Loimis. I
am she. I shall look nice. That is the kind of person that I am. I
shall live in the west always, and you will see me there as streaks of
colored light. I will turn my face to the east every evening on
pleasant days, and all the Wintu people will say when they see me,
'Winis Nomdal Lenas Loimis'" (look at Nomdal Lenas Loimis).

"Very well," said Norwan, "I am glad to hear what you say, my elder
sister."

Nomdal Lenas went off to the west. She was an immensely large woman
with a big face, her hair was cut across her forehead, and this made
it look beautiful. She was the first woman in the world who cut her
hair in that fashion. Her face was painted in streaks of red, yellow,
and white.

Next morning Hessiha saw another woman coming from the east. She
stopped at Norwan Buli, and said,--

"My younger sister, we came upon this earth at the same time, before
the Wintu people. I am going to the west a little distance. I came out
in the east, but I did not like the place there. I am going to Bohem
Buli. I will stay there and live on the north side of the mountain. I
will be a mountain woman. My name is Kukupiwit Pokte."

She went to Bohem Buli.

Norwan danced always during daylight, never stopped in the daytime,
never rested till evening.

Norbis Kiemila, the white oak which rolled to the southeast, looked
toward the northwest and saw Norwan. "I see my wife on this earth,"
said he.

One evening Hessiha and Norwan were in the sweat-house, and Hessiha
said,--

"My sister, I have heard news to-day from Norbis Kiemila. He says that
you are to be his wife."

She said nothing, and Hessiha talked on: "My sister, I heard a man say
that he would come to see you. He lives at Sonomyai--he is Sedit,
Sedit of Sonomyai."

"My brother," said Norwan, "what are you telling me?"

"I am telling you, my sister, what I have heard. Sedit is coming."

"Why does he come? I don't like him. He has a bad breath."

Next morning Norwan rose and began to dance.

"My sister," said Hessiha, that evening, "I hear that a man is coming
from Chanahl Puyuk, a good man. His name is Kaukau Herit. He is coming
to see you."

"Why does he come here?" asked Norwan. "His neck is too long, his legs
are too long."

"Well, my sister, I have heard that a man who lives far away west is
coming to see you, Kobalus Herit. He is a good man. He lives at Nomken
Kobalus Waimemton."

"That man has a crooked nose," said Norwan, "and a crooked mouth. I
don't like him, he is all twisted."

Next evening Hessiha said,--

"There is a man who lives at the same place as Kobalus Herit. He wants
to see you. His name is Tsanteris Herit."

"That man has a hollow breast," said Norwan. "I don't like him."

"A man from the far north is coming, Keli Herit."

"I don't like him," said Norwan; "he has a bad odor. He smells like
the earth."

"A man from way down south, Bisus Herit, is coming to see you."

"Oh, I don't like him; his legs are too short; he eats bony fish."

"My sister, a man is coming who lives a short distance south of us,
Tede Wiu Herit."

"I don't like him; he has too much breast; it sticks out too much."

"My sister, Katsi Herit is coming."

"I know him," said Norwan. "He is too quick-tempered: he gets angry
too easily."

"Chati Wai Halina Herit is coming to see you."

"I don't like him; he smells of pitch always.

"I must go now for wood; we have no wood this evening," said Norwan,
and she went out to bring some. She brought an armful, and while going
to the same place for a second bundle she heard some one coming. A man
took her by the arm. She turned, and saw Sedit of Sonomyai dressed
beautifully. She pushed him away and ran home. Sedit did not follow
her.

Next morning early she went out, and looking at one side of the door
saw two stones lying there, and a hooked stick four or five feet long,
called lakus, used to pull a limb of a tree toward you. She broke the
stones to pieces, broke the stick, threw the pieces in the fire, and
burned them. She knew that some man had put them there and intended to
come. That night she was lying on the south side of the sweat-house
and her brother on the north. It was dark, and they heard some one
coming toward the house. The stranger came in, sat down behind
Hessiha, sat with his head between his hands; his hair was sticking
out, and looked as though it had never been combed. Norwan looked at
this person, never took her eyes from him, but said not a word, and he
said nothing. After a while he stood up and walked out. While going he
threw something toward Norwan. It fell near her, and she picked it up.
It was a small net bag half full of mice. She threw it after the
stranger. He was Chati Wai Halina.

When morning came, Norwan took a bundle of brush, went to where the
visitor had sat, swept the place clean, and threw fresh earth on it.

The next night they heard some one walking outside. Soon a man came
in. He had a quiver in his hand made of deerskin. He looked around and
went over behind the place where Norwan was lying and sat down. She
lay there looking at him. After sitting awhile he lay down, stayed all
night, and went away just at daybreak. This was Norbis Kiemila.

In the early morning before dancing she built a fire outside and sat
down at it. That same morning Hessiha saw a man coming toward them,
coming from the southeast. When he came to where Norwan was at the
fire, he sat down. His name was Serin Dolite. He wore a bunch of fresh
leaves on each side of his head. He had a second name, Pai Homhoma.

"My sister," said this man, "I have come because my uncle sent me to
tell you that the people at Hlihli Pui Hlutton finished talking
yesterday, and they are going to have a great feast and a pleasant
time. 'Tell my niece,' said he, 'to come and dance with us.' My uncle
is Kopus Kiemila. He is named also Pui Uhlukyo. He is a Hlahi. He sent
word to Norbis two days ago, and he sent word to Kaukau Herit. He has
sent word everywhere. There will be a great many people in Hlihli Pui
Hlutton. He has sent word to Sedit, who lives at Sonomyai, and to
Katsi Herit, who lives opposite Pas Puisono, and to Kobalus Herit and
Tsanteris Herit and Keli Herit and to Tede Wiu Herit, who lives at Koï
Nomsono, and many others. He has sent to your brother Waida Werris.
Waida Werris may come; he may not. Kopus Kiemila wants you to come
surely."

"Very well," said Norwan, "I will go to-morrow."

Serin Dolite was satisfied and went away.

"Now, my little brother," said Norwan to Hessiha that night, "I am
going away to-morrow. You will stay here, I hope. I shall be glad if
you stay at home and take care of this house."

When she rose in the morning, she stretched her right hand toward the
southeast and got buri luli, which are very beautiful red flowers. She
put her hand there a second time, and to her hand came hawe luli, pure
white blossoms, for clothing. A third time she put her hand out, and
hluyuk luli, which are the star flowers, came on it. These she put
around her head as a garland, and made shoes of the same flowers. Then
she took her staff yósoü.

"My brother," said she, when dressed, "I am ready to go."

"My brother's daughter," called Kar Kiemila from Olelpanti when she
was starting, "go and dance. I will sit here and look at you."
Sweat-house doors look toward the south usually, but the great one
above, made by Olelbis, on which Kar Kiemila was sitting, had its door
in the east, because Olelbis took most of his beautiful things from
the southeast, and he could look down in that direction from the door
of his house in Olelpanti. The door in Hlihli Pui Hlutton was toward
the west, because from that door they could see the great house in
Olelpanti. The house built by Olelbis was the best in all the world,
above or below. Kopus Kiemila's house was second to it, and the best
in the lower land.

Norwan went at the time appointed, and Hessiha stayed behind at Norwan
Buli. When Serin Dolite brought the invitation, Norwan made him
promise to meet her on the road.

"You must come," said she, "to give me news before I reach the
sweat-house."

Just at the edge of a place called Pui Toror, Serin Dolite ran out and
met Norwan.

"Oh, my sister," said he, "Kopus Kiemila sent me to say to you to come
quickly, to hurry. The people from every place are there now. All
those have come of whom I told you, except Norbis and your brother
Waida Werris; they have not come yet. Besides others, Boki Kiemila
from Hlop Henmenas has come. You must hurry as much as you can, and
come quickly."

When he had given the message, he rushed back and left Norwan to
travel at her own pace. She went along the top of Pui Toror, and came
to a spot where she heard much laughing and talking. Soon she saw a
large crowd of children playing. The ground was smooth,--no rocks, no
grass, just level land. When she came up, the children said to her,--

"Our elder sister, we want to see the dance. We want to go to the
sweat-house, but we have nothing to wear; we have no clothes and we
can get none."

The girls were all of the Tsudi people, the boys, Patkilises. Norwan
looked around and saw at some distance a great many sunflower leaves.

"We took leaves like those," said one of the boys, "and tried to put
them on as ears, but we could not make them stay."

Norwan stretched her hand southward, and gray fog which rises from
water came on it. She put this fog on a Patkilis boy to wear. She
stretched her hand to the east, and red and yellow feathers came to
it. Of these she made ears for that Patkilis boy. She put her hand
south and found willow catkins, white ones, and made a tail and put it
on the Patkilis boy. She gave him shoes made of the catkins. When that
one boy was dressed, she said, "Let all the others be like this one;"
and that moment all Patkilis boys were like him.

Now she took acorn mould, green and brown, put it on one of the Tsudi
girls. She took yósoü leaves from her staff (the leaves are like mice
ears), and put them on the girl for ears. She took more acorn mould,
rubbed and rolled it out like a little stick, and made a tail. When
one Tsudi girl was dressed nicely, she said, "Let all the others be
like this one;" and that moment they were like her.

"Now, sister," said they, "we are ready."

Norwan started, and all the Tsudi girls and Patkilis boys went with
her. When they came to the door of the sweat-house, they looked around
and saw that all the trees were full of fresh, beautiful acorns; the
top of the house was covered with them. There were piles and piles of
acorns inside and around the sweat-house, and a little way off a
great many trees were loaded with fruit.

From Olelpanti they could see down into Hlihli Puihlutton. All persons
who had come were inside. Norwan looked in and saw many people, all
looking toward the door.

"See Norwan coming," said they. "She is beautiful,--oh, she is
beautiful!"

Kopus Kiemila was on the south side, near the door. He had five sacks
of acorns near him. He was singing over them, singing about health and
soundness. When he saw Norwan, he said,--

"Come in; come in, my brother's daughter. You are one of the last. All
have come but two."

She went beyond Kopus to a seat. A young woman who was sitting near
rose and said,--

"Come, my sister; come and sit with me."

This was Hlihli Loimis. Her brother Hlihli Herit stood always on top
of Kopus's house and called, "Hai! Hai!" which means "Come! Come!" and
beckoned with his hand for people to enter.

Norwan sat down at the south side of the door, and all the Tsudi and
Patkilis children took their places behind her.

"You are almost the last to come," said Hlihli Loimis. "Look at the
north side of the house. See how many people are there. See the light;
that is Kaukau Herit. He is white and shining; light beams from him."

"Now," said Kopus, "all you people from the north, my sons-in-law and
my daughters-in-law, make ready to dance."

The northern people rose at his call and danced. Kaukau Herit danced.
When he rose and moved, it was as when a light is brought into a dark
place. He danced five times and sat down.

"Now, my sons-in-law," said Kopus, "sit back and look on. My
sons-in-law from the west, you will dance now; dance you, Katsi Herit
and Sedit of Sonomyai, and dance you, my daughters-in-law."

The western people danced; Sedit, Boki, all danced. While they were
dancing, they dropped beautiful shells. These shells fell from them as
snow falls from the sky, and the whole floor was covered with shells,
just as mountains in winter are covered with snow.

"Now sit back and look on," said Kopus. The western people sat down.

"My sons-in-law and my daughters-in-law," called Kopus to the southern
people, "make ready to dance."

The two Tede Wiu brothers from Koï Nomsono were to lead the southern
people in the dance. Kopus called five times; the southern people did
not move. Then the elder Tede Wiu made a step and stopped; when he
raised his foot to take a second step, all began to dance. Both
brothers carried a load of mempak on their arms, and each had a flint
knife. As they danced they attached long strings of mempak to one side
of the house higher than a man's head; they extended the strings to
the other side and tied them there. They stretched mempak in this way
from side to side as they danced, and from end to end, lengthwise and
crosswise; then they danced under it. The beautiful strings were
shining in every color just above their heads. The music, the mempak,
and the dancing were so beautiful that all were delighted; all people
were glad; they could hardly sit still and look on.

The brothers danced up to where Kopus was sitting, took strings of
shell and mempak from their necks and heads, and put them down before
him; next they put down their two beautiful knives. When they had done
this they danced away to the other end of the sweat-house, and then
danced up again to where Kopus was.

Norwan rose and began to dance without knowing it. She could not help
dancing. Every one looked at her. She danced with the two brothers,
danced away to the other side of the house with them. Only after a
time did she see that she was dancing.

The two brothers sat down; she sat with them. Then the three stood up
and went out.

They had just gone when Norbis came in. He was splendidly dressed,
wore mempak, had a garland of fresh young leaves on his head, and on
the top of it mempak. He sat down and asked some one near by,--

"Where is my wife?"

"Norwan has gone with the two Tede Wiu brothers."

"I don't believe that!" said Norbis.

He sprang up, went around, and asked others. All said, "She is with
the Tede Wiu brothers."

At last Norbis went out, taking his people. They had gone into the
house, but had not danced. They followed at his call. He went swiftly
to the northwest to overtake the two brothers.

The dance was at an end. All started home. Daylight was near.

The two brothers did not go to Norwan Buli Hlut, which was farther
north than Koï Nomsono. They kept the woman at their own house till
morning. When they reached home each of the brothers said,--

"My people, be ready for a great hunt at daybreak."

When daylight came the elder brother said,--

"Come, my people, we will eat together. You must all eat with me this
morning."

While eating they heard shouts on the west bank of Bohema Mem, and
soon they saw two men running toward them,--men finely dressed, with
plumes on their heads. The men crossed the river, and came to the
house of the Tede Wius. They were the Wul Wuhl brothers.

"We are here to tell you," said they, "that Norbis is very angry. He
has roused all his people, and they are coming. He has sent us to tell
you that he is beyond the Bohema Mem waiting for you. Norbis asks you
to send out that woman to him."

The brothers said nothing.

"If you give her, he will go home; if not, he will fight with you."

"We cannot give her," said the elder Tede Wiu. "We did not go to the
dance for her; we did not take her away from it. She came with us of
her own will. If we give her away, she may come back right away to us.
She can go where she likes, but we will not give her to any one."

The two messengers took this answer to Norbis.

"I believe this man will come against us," said each of the brothers.
They went into the house and brought out elkskin armor.[4]

    [4] Untanned elkskin was formerly used as armor by the Indians.

"Come, my people," said the elder, "take these, put them on."

They brought out more and more armor of untanned elkskin, and the
people began to make ready for battle. It was not long till they saw
two other men coming. These did not cross the river. They stood on the
western bank and shouted,--

"Be ready! Prepare for battle! Norbis asks you to come to the river
and cross. We will fight you on this side."

When the brothers heard this, their people put on the elkskins and
hastened. The brothers left Norwan in their house, and bound it
outside with mempak. The whole house was covered with mempak; no one
could get out, no one could go in, they thought.

This done, the brothers crossed the river with their men. They looked
down toward the south, and saw Norbis with his people moving along on
the western bank of Bohema Mem, and they extended as far as the eye
could see.

"There are none there but Norbis and his people," said the Wul Wuhl
brothers; "they are not all like him, but they are all his people."

The forces met, and both sides began to fight at once, and fought
stubbornly. Norbis drove the Tede Wiu brothers to the edge of the
water, but they rallied at the river bank and drove back his forces. A
second time Norbis pushed them to the river; a second time they
rallied and drove him back, drove back all his people. They fought all
day, each side driving the other in turn. It was a hard and bloody
battle; many were killed on both sides. Neither won, and both were
very angry. When night came the Tede Wiu brothers said,--

"We will stop for to-day. If you wish to fight to-morrow, we will meet
you here."

"I will meet you here," answered Norbis.

The Tede Wiu brothers went home. They found Norwan where they had left
her, fastened in with mempak. That evening, when all were assembled
and were talking, the elder brother said:

"My people, if they want to fight to-morrow we will fight with them."

He called a messenger then and said,--

"Go you and tell my brother Sehinom Chabatu to come and help me, and
to come early in the morning. Go also to Waiti Nomken, a place on the
upper Bohema Mem, to two women Kawas Loimis; let them know that we are
fighting. On this side of their house lives Chir Chuma, a lame man;
let him know. Opposite Pas Puisono lives Katsi Herit. Tell him to come
early to-morrow. A short distance from Tsarau Heril lives Wik Herit.
Tell him to be here. These are all great men, and each will bring his
people. There is a man who lives at Kilichepin Kenharas. Kilichepis is
his name. Tell him to come with his people. There is a man who lives
at Sudi Sawul. His name is Tuichi Kelis. Tell this man that I expect
him early with his people. All these big men will help us greatly."

Norbis sent messengers to his friends. They went southeast, south and
southwest. He sent southeast to Saias Saias Herit and south for Hus
Herit. He sent for Karili Herit; for Tcutuhl Herit.

Next morning about daylight the friends of the Tede Wiu brothers came.
All came who had been called, each bringing his own people. Friends
came to Norbis in the same way; none of those invited failed on either
side.

When all Tede Wiu's friends had come, the elder brother confined
Norwan as on the first day. He bound the house all around with mempak.
They started then, and crossed the river with many people. Chir Chuma
had come. He was so lame that he could not walk, and had two men to
carry him. These were the two Siriwit brothers (whirlwinds). (The
whirlwinds were people at that time.)

The Siriwits carried Chir Chuma on two sticks. He sat on the sticks.
One brother held the sticks behind, and the other in front. They
moved around with great speed, and travelled as easily on water as on
land. When the two brothers had crossed the river, they saw two more
lame men, one coming from the north, Chali Dokos: he was carried by
Wainot Herit. The other was Sawi Herit; he was coming from the west,
carried by Kichinot Herit.

After Tede Wiu's forces had crossed the river, the Wul Wuhl brothers
came from Norbis, and said,--

"There are many people coming from the south with Norbis to-day. You
will have a heavy battle."

Sehinom saw the southern people coming, and said to the elder Tede
Wiu,--

"My brother, I will be with you all the time. I will guard you."

Three of Tede Wiu's men, Wik Herit, Tuichi Kelis, and Kilichepis,
said,--

"We will go together. We will go to the eastern side, near the river,
and take our people with us."

When going they turned to the Wul Wuhl brothers or Norbis's men, and
said,--

"Tell Saias Saias Herit, Koip Herit, and Tsutsu Herit to come toward
the river. We will fight them there."

"I will," said the elder Wul Wuhl; and turning to Chir Chuma, he said:
"There is a man with a net coming from the south, Karili Herit; he
will fight with you."

The Kawas sisters came now on Tede Wiu's side, bringing food,
elkskins, and arrows for their brother, Sehinom Chabatu. They did not
go where the fighting was, but stood back in the rear a little. Now
Wai Charatawa came to Tede Wiu's side. He was a very small man and
left-handed, but a great chief, a brother to Sehinom and to Wik Herit.
He had his hair tied up and fastened in front with a long bone sharp
at one end.

Norhara Chepmis came to help Norbis on the southern side.

Before the struggle began Norbis sent a message to the brothers,
asking, "Are you willing to give up that woman?"

They refused.

"Now, my people," said Norbis, "we are going to fight. I have done
what I could to persuade these brothers to give up Norwan, but they
refuse, and we are going to fight a second time."

At this moment Kiri Hubit came from the south, a strong man. He went
to the east side to fight. He had only one arrow without a point.

When all these forces met, there was a terrible uproar.

"Now," cried Wul Wuhl, "a man from the south is coming; he is small,
but brave and quick-tempered, a terrible fighter. He will strike on
the left flank. His name is Nor Patsas Herit."

Yipokus Herit, who lived on the northeastern slope of Bohem Puyuk, was
to be on the field at midday; he was the one to fight Nor Patsas. His
weapons were ice and snow.

Just at this time Norwan found a weak place in the mempak and untied
it. As soon as she was out she went home to Norwan Buli.

When ready to meet, the two armies saw a very big woman coming from
the northwest: an old woman, Nom Toposloni Pokaila. She was carrying
on her back a great basket, as big as a house. This basket was full of
pounded fir-bark, which makes the skin itch terribly and almost blinds
every eye that it touches.

A man came from the northwest to the southern army, and said to Wul
Wuhl,--

"Tell your man Norhara Chepmis not to engage in battle; let him stand
aside and look on. I will do as he does." This man was Wainom Yola
Herit. "If he fights on the southern side, I will do the same on the
northern."

Wul Wuhl gave the message. Norhara drew back, and Wainom Yola did the
same.

The two armies stood opposite, each looking the other in the face,
each waiting for the other to begin.

At this moment the Siriwit brothers left the ranks on the east, the
left wing of the northern army, and went careering around with Chir
Chuma on two sticks. Now Nor Patsas, the small peevish southern man,
saw Chir Chuma (the Siriwits were invisible), and could contain his
wrath no longer. He ran at the lame man with all his might. When just
in front of Chir Chuma, he struck the ground with his brand, and one
hundred people, as passionate and peevish as himself, sprang up around
him. But Chir Chuma rode right over Nor Patsas. The Siriwits knocked
him to one side, rushed across his men, trampled, beat, and killed
them.

The Siriwit brothers went some distance along the front rank, then
turned back and rushed to where Nor Patsas had fallen. He was on his
feet again, and dashed a second time at Chir Chuma. When just before
the enemy, Nor Patsas struck his brand against the ground, a hundred
men leaped up around him; all sprang on Chir Chuma, but the two
brothers scattered and trampled every one of them.

Nor Patsas was raging. He had never been so angry in his life till
that day. He turned and rushed at the northern army. He struck the
ground once, twice, three times with his brand, and three hundred
raging men were there around him. A battle began on the left northern
wing, fierce and very bloody. Nor Patsas found no one to match him
till Chir Chuma returned. The Siriwits were somewhat tired, and went
more slowly while Chir Chuma fought with Nor Patsas. Chir Chuma had a
red flint, called also sucker flint. With every blow of this he killed
fifty and sometimes sixty people. When Nor Patsas gave a blow, he
killed as many, and every time he struck the ground with his brand a
hundred warriors sprang up to help him.

The fight begun by Nor Patsas with Chir Chuma brought in the two
armies. Both sides fought desperately, but no one could conquer Nor
Patsas till Yipokus came at midday. He rushed at the peevish,
passionate warrior with weapons made of ice and snow. In the heat of
battle water flowed from them and killed Nor Patsas, quenched the life
in him. The southern army was pushed back, and driven a long distance
down the river.

In the middle of the afternoon they rallied, turned on the pursuers,
drove them to the field where they began in the morning, and were
driving them farther, when Nom Toposloni ran past, and, throwing her
crushed bark with the wind, filled many eyes with it and almost
blinded them. She brought disorder to the southern army.

Norbis, afraid of being beaten, was ready now for anything. He called
in Norhara Chepmis, who ran swiftly from the southwest with his
warriors. A mighty storm of wind swept forward with Norhara. He struck
the northern army fiercely. Wainom Yola, seeing this, rushed at the
southern force with all his people, and they were so many that no man
could count them. They were as swift as arrows. A roaring wind went
with them.

Wainom Yola cut right through the southern army, and, turning, rushed
toward Norhara Chepmis and his warriors. These two with their armies
fought hardest of all on that day. In half an hour very few were left
alive on either side, and those left were so weak that Norhara Chepmis
and Wainom Yola were hardly able to lead them from the field.

There was not a man in the forces of the Tede Wiu brothers or Norbis
who was not covered with snow and drenched with rain; all were
shivering and nearly dead.

No one wished to fight for a long time after that day.

Norbis went home to the southeast without Norwan, the woman he called
his wife; and when the Tede Wiu brothers went back to their house in
the evening, they found that Norwan had escaped to Norwan Buli.

This was the end of the first battle on earth. None gained anything,
and many were killed. Later there was another battle among the first
people, and afterward many among the Wintus when they came up.

After Norwan had been at home awhile she said one day to Hessiha,--

"My brother, I did wrong. When I think of it now, I see that I did
wrong. I understand all to-day. I see that if I had not danced with
Tede Wiu, if I had not gone home with him, there would have been no
fighting, no trouble in this world. If I had gone with Norbis at the
dance, there would have been no battles, there would have been no
killing; but I did not want to go with Norbis. I do not know why; but
in some way I did not like him. I was dancing with Tede Wiu, and
sitting with him, and going away with him before I knew what I was
doing."

Sehinom Chabatu, after the close of the first great battle, went home
and lived on Wini Mem five years before any trouble came to him. While
helping Tede Wiu in his fight with Norbis, Sehinom killed Saias Saias
and Chuchu, two of the best men among Norbis's forces.

All the southern people talked of these two, and told how they had
died. A great man, far off in the southeast, heard of this. He was
chief of the two when they were living, and his name was Chulup Win
Herit. He was a slender, strong person. When he had heard the whole
story, he said,--

"I have never liked fighting, I do not like fighting now. I have never
gone to war, but I am going to war now. Norbis attacked Tede Wiu, he
fought with him. Norbis has shown me what fighting is, and I am going
to fight now."

Chulup inquired everywhere to discover who had killed these two men;
he wished to be sure. All people said everywhere, "Sehinom Chabatu did
it."

It was really Chir Chuma who had killed them. But Chir Chuma was under
Sehinom Chabatu, and the blame was put on Sehinom.

They talked it all over, talked a whole night, and Chulup sent this
message to Sehinom,--

"I should like to see you, I want you to come to Miol Tapa, near
Puidal Pom. I will meet you there. If you want to fight, I will fight
with you at that place."

The messenger was Tsotso Tokos Herit. While Chulup was instructing his
messenger, Sehinom's grandmother was talking to him. This grandmother
was a very old woman, Chir Pokaila; she was called also Kahi Buli
Pokaila. She knew what was happening far away in the east, and what
was going to happen soon, though nobody had told her: she knew with
her own mind.

"My grandson," said she, "you have been fighting, you have been at
war, and people will talk much of you. My grandson, you will hear
something very soon. You must do what is best, take care of yourself.
I will tell you what to do: when you go hunting or fishing, never go
toward the east. Go north, west, and south, but never go east; the
people in the east are talking of you. My grandson, I did not know
that you were going to do the things that you have done. When I was
rearing you and you were a baby yet, I told you how to hunt and fish;
no more. I did not think that you would fight and strike down strong
people. But there is a woman at Norwan Buli who brought all this
trouble into the world; this fighting began for her, and now it will
continue always and everywhere; there will never be an end to fighting
in this world now. This place where we are living would have been good
but for that woman. Now, from this time on, all these trees,
mountains, rocks, all people in this world, will be bad and will hurt
others. (This means that people will use stones, sticks, and
everything to fight with when they are angry.)

"Now, my grandson, you must do as I tell you. My brother lives near
by, he lives at Kahi Buli, his name is Kahit. Go and see him every
morning early. And there is a man who lives a little farther away, up
at Waitami. He is your brother. Go and see him every evening. He is a
great man, he can do everything. His name is Katsi Herit. My two
sisters live at Waiti Nomken. They have been in the war and have seen
all the fighting. They are the Kawas Loimis sisters.

"My grandson, we cannot live as we used to live. We must live
differently. I am getting very angry. We cannot eat, we cannot sleep
as in the old time. When you went to war you killed two great men,
two of the best men. Long, long ago Chulup, a great chief, went far
away east, and has lived there since that time. He is going to come
soon to see you. Take care of yourself; be on your guard. When he
started east Chulup went to the edge of the great water and went under
the ground to it, he went through the ground, and he lives in the east
now on the bed of the great water.

"I will tell you what is going to happen soon. I am getting angry, and
when I am angry you will feel a cold wind coming from the north. That
wind comes because I am angry."

When Sehinom Chabatu went south, he was young yet, not grown; and now,
when his grandmother knew what was happening in the east, she was
instructing him. The place where they lived was Dau Paki Olel, a mile
higher up than the mouth of Wini Mem.

One morning Sehinom Chabatu called all his people together. The old
woman knew that some one was coming, and that day Tsotso Tokos came.
He was sent by Chulup. When the old woman knew that he was near, she
went into the house, brought out a quiver full of arrows, and hung it
on a tree. Then she got a tuichu kilis, which is a net faced with
white down, put it on her head, took the quiver, and ran some distance
from the house, and rushed about in great fury. She acted like some
one who is going to fight. People watched her.

"What is the matter with that old woman?" asked one person of another.

After a time she came back and sat down. A few minutes later a man
was seen running in from the east, and soon Tsotso Tokos was at the
house.

"Sehinom Chabatu," said he, "I am here to tell you what Chulup says.
He says that he is growing angry; that he wants you to go to Miol Tapa
to-morrow; that he will meet you there; that he has his men with him.
He has gathered many people. He will wait for you at Miol Tapa."

When Tsotso Tokos had said these words, he went away. The old woman
rose and said,--

"My grandson, do not sit long. Rise up. That of which I told you, a
while ago has happened. I told you that trouble was coming. Send word
now to the two Tede Wiu brothers. Send word to all your friends. Tell
them to come quickly to help you."

Sehinom Chabatu sent a message to the Tede Wiu brothers, and a second
one to the northwest, a third to the north, and a fourth to the
southwest. In the north he sent to Sau Herit and to Kichuna Herit, to
Hokohas Herit of Puidal Pom. Hokohas's people wore elkskin armor at
all times; to Koyumas Herit, and to Puike Tsumu, a great chief, though
lame. He sent to all who had been with the Tede Wiu brothers in the
first war.

All came, and still others joined them. Among these was Cho Herit, who
had a great many people. Sehinom's grandmother was terribly excited.
She danced madly and ran around everywhere; she danced that night and
the next day. The second morning all came very early to join
Sehinom's forces. The first came at daybreak, and one people followed
another the whole day and the next night.

Chir Chuma, carried by two Siriwit brothers, came. Wai Karili, who
lived on the south bank of Wini Mem, came. All his people had nets.
Bulibok came from Bulibok Puyuk, and when the people on the road sat
down to rest, he went ahead and called out,--

"Shoot at me, all you people! I want to see what kind of person I am
going to be."

All shot at him. He sat still, but no one could hit him. And Kaisus
Herit from Puidal Pom went ahead too, and asked all to shoot at him. A
great many tried, but no one could hit Kaisus Herit.

Tichelis from Penehl Kente came, bringing his people.

"You are my brother," said he to Kaisus; "we will go together."

One Sedit came from Buli Puiwakat, and another from Sonomyai.

When all the people had assembled at Sehinom's, Wik Herit picked up
dead coals and blackened his face. "I want to see fighting," said he.
"I am a brave warrior. I want to fight;" then he puffed and strutted
tremendously.

Nomel Hiwili, who lived at Waiel Nomeltos, came, bringing his people.

"My brother," said he to Sehinom, "I am not very strong, I cannot do
much, but I will go with you and do what I can."

When they went to the place where the battle was to be fought, a
messenger came and said,--

"Saiai Not Herit is coming to see you. He has no heart, and all his
people are without hearts. Saiai Not wants to fight with you. Kichuna
from Kinwinis Pom and Hamam Herit from the east wish to fight with
you. All these people are at Memnom Kalai now, not far from here."

At this time they saw some one coming toward them from the east. This
was a second Chir Pokaila. She was from Pokaitin Mem. When she came up
she said to Sehinom's grandmother,--

"My sister, we will help our grandson, and if he is killed we will
mourn over him together."

"It is time to move now," said Sehinom.

"We will be in the centre of the army," said the Tede Wiu brothers,
and they took their places. Wai Karili went to the south wing of the
northern army, and all his people with him. They went up on a level
mound, and from there saw people coming on both sides, from the north
and the south, as far as the eye could see. They came on like a great
water, rolling forward. The people were in number as the grains in two
clouds of sand. The two armies approached each other gradually.

Sehinom's grandmother, with her sister, was in front of the northern
forces. She engaged the enemy first, and fought fiercely. She had
arrows of kopus wood, pointed with Chirdokos, all made by herself. The
northern army faced the east, and the southern the west.

Chir Chuma, carried by the Siriwits, came to help his two sisters.
All three had the same kind of arrows. They killed fifty and sixty at
a shot, and these three gave victory to the left wing of the northern
army.

On the right flank of the northern and left flank of the southern army
were good men, and there was hard fighting. On the northern side was
Wai Karili with his people, having nets to catch the enemy. Then
Hokohas and his forces, all dressed in elkskin armor; next Kaisus and
Tichelis, with many people. Between Tichelis and the centre was
Kichuna. On the other side, opposite Kichuna, was Hamam, who had sent
word to Kichuna that he would meet him on the field. Opposite Sedit of
Sonomyai was an unknown chief, but a very great fighter.

Wai Karili, Hokohas, Kaisus, and Tichelis with their forces were met
by Hawt and Tsuini, whose people outnumbered those of the four chiefs
opposed to them. The Hawts used solid blue rocks as weapons. They
hurled them with great force, breaking the armor of Hokohas's people
and tearing the nets of Karili's men. The Tsuini people threw smaller
stones from slings in great showers at the people of Tichelis and
Kaisus.

The battle raged with fury on that flank till evening. Many were
killed on both sides, and of the chiefs Hamam and Sedit of Sonomyai
fell. Neither side had the victory when night came, though Hawt and
Tsuini were gaining a little.

In the centre were the great chiefs of both armies. There Chulup,
supported by Saiai Not, Tenek Not, and Tubuk, met Sehinom Chabatu and
the Tede Wiu brothers.

In the morning Chulup began the fighting, and cut into the centre. In
the middle of the forenoon he had gone half-way through Sehinom's
people. But Sehinom forced him back, and at midday Chulup was where he
had begun in the morning. Sehinom advanced now, and tried to cut
through Chulup's people. He had gone more than half-way when Chulup
rallied, pressed around him, pushed him back, and at sundown had
rushed forward among Sehinom's warriors.

Just at that time Sehinom saw in the field behind Chulup a tall and
very beautiful woman. She was Chulup's wife. Her name was Sanihas.
Sehinom Chabatu ran quickly to this woman, and led her to his own
camp, while Chulup was struggling with the Tede Wiu brothers. The sun
was down now. Night had come.

Chulup dropped back to his own place. He had lost his wife and gained
nothing. Both sides went from the battlefield and made camp-fires. You
could see the two lines of fire running north and south, but could not
see either end of them.

Chulup rose at daybreak next morning, rushed to Sehinom's camp, and
after a sharp and short fight took his wife back before sunrise. Both
sides were very angry and fought hard. At midday the southern forces
had the advantage in the centre and the southern flank, and would have
beaten Sehinom Chabatu but for his grandmother, his uncle, and his
aunt. The two women and Chir Chuma, carried on two sticks by the
Siriwit brothers, had beaten everything in front of them.

At this time the centre and flank of the northern forces had suffered
much. Wai Karili left the fight; he was angry.

"I will do something better than this," said he.

Taking his net, he went off to the southeast, and never stopped till
he was at the edge of the earth, and had found the opening through
which Chulup passed when he came out on land or went back to his home
on the bed of the great eastern water. He laid the net across the
hole, thrust the middle of it in deeply, covered what was left
outside, and waited in hiding.

At noon, when Sehinom Chabatu was hard pressed and the enemy were
pushing his people from the field, his grandmother, aunt, and uncle,
with the whole army behind them, fell upon the rear of Chulup's
forces. The struggle began anew, and from then till sunset was fought
the hardest battle of the world up to that day. At sunset they had to
stop, for there were few people left on either side, and those were so
tired that they could fight no longer.

Each side left the field without saying a word to the other.

Chulup sent his wife Sanihas home by another way, and went himself to
the passage where Wai Karili was hiding. He went into the opening.
Karili drew the net, closed it around Chulup, and tied it firmly. He
put it on his back then, and carried Chulup to Tehi Buli, some
distance east of Bohem Puyuk. There he taunted him, saying:

"Now, Chulup, you did not take me, but I have taken you. You are not
going to kill me, but I am going to kill you. Who is better, you or
I?" Then he killed him, and pounded his body fine.

When Sehinom Chabatu went home his grandmother said to him,--

"Now, my grandson, you are becoming a strong man; you know how to
fight, but men who fight do not live long. I have never told you to
fight, but from this on you will see fighting. You must keep awake, my
grandson. You must rise early, you must not sleep long; some day you
will hear news, some day something will happen."

After that Sehinom Chabatu brought the tallest yellow pine from beyond
Dau Paki Olel, stripped all the bark off, painted it white, black, and
red. The people danced around this pole, danced two days.

"We will go home now," said the Tede Wiu brothers, "but perhaps
something will happen later on."

Then Dokos said to Wik Kiemila: "We have had all this fighting, we may
have more fighting yet; people may come to attack us, to kill you or
me."

"My father-in-law," said Wai Dokos to Wik Kiemila, "we have killed a
great man, Chulup Win Herit. I think now that we shall have much
trouble; he was the chief of many people; they will attack us."

After this talk all went home. People lived in peace for two years.

"I will go and sleep in the sweat-house," said Sehinom Chabatu one
night. He went. There were many in the sweat-house, and a greater
number outside. Usually Chir Pokaila knew everything; but this night
the old woman did not know that trouble was coming, she was in her own
house asleep.

The door of Sehinom's sweat-house was on the east, and he was sleeping
on the north side. Just before daylight some of the men lying outside
woke up, and some in the sweat-house were awake, but none had risen
yet. All at once they heard an uproar, a crowd of men shouting.

When the people around the sweat-house heard this shouting, they took
their arms and ran forward. All inside the sweat-house rushed to the
door, and as soon as they were out strange people killed them.

Sehinom Chabatu remained in the sweat-house. Chir Pokaila was taking
bow and arrows to her grandson, but when she reached the door she was
killed.

Chir Chuma, who lived near by, came when he heard the uproar. He was
carried by the Siriwits, and went around fighting here and fighting
there, killing many.

Sehinom, in the sweat-house, heard some one outside asking,--

"Is this Sehinom Chabatu's house? I cannot find him. He is not among
these people. Perhaps this is not his house at all. I should like to
see Sehinom Chabatu. If he is brave, he will come out. I am Sutunut."

Others cried, "I am Hus!" "I am Chutuhl!" "I am Koip!" "I want to see
Sehinom Chabatu!"

All the people outside were killed now, except Chir Chuma. The
Siriwits had carried him home. Sehinom Chabatu was left in the
sweat-house. It was about the middle of the forenoon when all were
killed, and the strangers set fire to the sweat-house. There was a log
at each side of the door for people to sit on. Sehinom went into the
ground, and came out under the log on the left side. He dug forward,
as the fire moved, till he came near the end of the log. It was burned
out now except a very short piece. He stopped under that.

Sutunut's people stood around watching for him.

"We should like to know where he is," said they. "The sweat-house is
burned. He was not there or he would have run out." They pushed the
cinders about,--found no trace of his bones. "He cannot be under this
log," said one man; but he did not touch the burning log.

At last, about dark, when the log was burned almost to the very end,
Sutunut and all his people went away.

Sehinom Chabatu heard everything they said. When they had gone and all
was silent, he crept out from under the ground; he saw his friends
lying dead, the houses destroyed, and the sweat-house burned down. He
cried all night,--mourned for his friends, mourned until daylight. At
daylight he walked around everywhere; looked at the ruins; did not
know what to do; walked around again and again.

Just before sunrise he heard something and stopped to listen. There
was a sound like the cry of a little dog. He looked, and saw at last a
piece of bark of the yellow pine. The noise came from under that bark.

"What can be under this bark?" thought Sehinom, and turning it over he
found two little boys lying in each other's arms and crying. He
stooped down and took them up.

"Now, brother," said one of them, "we had luck. We hid here and
escaped."

They were Tsudi boys. Sehinom Chabatu took the boys to care for them.
He buried all the people he could find, took the two little boys, and
went up Pui Mem to get kopus wood for arrows. He found the wood,
brought it home, and made four hundred arrows. Then he made five bows
of yew wood.

The two boys grew very fast. Sehinom gave a bow and forty arrows to
each of them and said,--

"I wish you could do something for me, but you are so small I don't
like to send you."

"We can go wherever you send us," said the elder boy.

"Well, my little brother," said Sehinom next morning, "go and tell my
two sisters, Kawas Loimis in Waiti Nomken to come here. Tell them that
I am hungry, that I have nothing to eat. Say that I am starving. Tell
them to bring food to me. From my sisters go to my brother Kichuna; he
lives at Kenwinis Pom. Go next to Wai Hau, at Hau Buli, then to Nomel
Hiwili at Waiel Nomeltos. Go to Dokos Hilit; you will find his house
by inquiring; from there to my father-in-law, Nom Sowiwi. Tell these
people to come to me and bring all their forces."

Then, turning to the other brother, he said: "I will send you, my
little brother, down south. I want you to go to Tidok Kiemila at Tidok
Waisono. This old man and his people have plenty of feather dresses
for war. Go to the Tede Wiu brothers; go to Hokohas Herit. Go eastward
to Dokos Herit, at Dokos Hleï Puriton; go to Kaisus at Kaisansi
Haraston, tell all to come to-morrow and bring their people."

The elder Tsudi brother came back in the evening. "Your sisters will
come to-morrow morning," said he, "and the others will all come."

The younger brother came back a little later. "All the people will
come to-morrow morning," said he: "all the Hokohas people with their
elkskins, all the Tidok people will come with their feather
headdresses. When I went to the Tede Wiu brothers, they said: 'Sehinom
Chabatu has great trouble.' I said: 'He has, indeed; my brother and I
are all that are left.' 'He is our brother,' said they; 'we must help
him.'"

Next morning the two Kawas sisters came, bringing many things. Each
brought two elkskins and a great many arrows and otter-skins.

"Now, brother, eat and feed the two little boys," said they, taking
out food.

People began to come. They came from every direction, from all sides.
All that day they poured in; in the evening and night they kept
coming. Sehinom Chabatu had to wait some days for all to come. The
Kawas sisters had food for every one.

"We heard that you were killed," said the Tede Wiu brothers when they
came. "We are glad to see you living."

"I am alone," said Sehinom. "I do not know what saved me. All my
people were killed except these two little boys."

The Tede Wiu brothers were the first to come from the south. Next came
the Tidok people. They came in crowds, in thousands, and every one had
a feather net on his head. They began to come in the morning, and kept
coming all day, all night, on the morrow, and second night, without
stopping. They came without stopping for twelve days and nights, they
came till there was no room for them anywhere around. More Tidoks
remained at home than came, and more Tidoks came than all other people
put together.

"You people," said Sehinom Chabatu, when all had come, "I did not
cause this war and fighting. I did not begin. The war was made by the
Tede Wiu brothers and Norbis."

"Now, my brothers," said Sehinom Chabatu to the Tede Wiu brothers,
"people far off talk of me; but you caused the trouble. You began it,
and you must do your best to help me. We must leave here to-morrow
morning."

They started next morning early. Sehinom Chabatu gave orders to travel
in parties. They moved toward the southeast. The last party of the
first day left in the evening. When night came the van of the army
camped and the rear marched all night.

When Sutunut's forces came northward from the edge of the sky in the
south to attack Sehinom's people, they made a trail coming and going.
Now, Sehinom's army followed this trail. They travelled the second day
till they reached a camping-place of the returning southern army.
There they spent the night. At noon of the third day they sent Kaisus
and Bulibok ahead to look for the enemy. They went to the south. On
the following morning they came back and said,--

"We found a cañon where they camped; you can camp there."

The army moved on. The two Kawas sisters had food to give the whole
army; the two baskets were never empty, and all had enough.

They stayed three days in the cañon, and the Tidok people never
stopped coming.

"We have far to go; you must hurry," said Sehinom next day; and the
Tidok forces began to travel faster. Sehinom sent forward Hus as a
scout. Before daybreak all rose and travelled till evening. Hus came
back and said,--

"I have been very far down. I found another place where they camped. I
went farther south then, till I saw fire and smoke far away. We can
rest to-night in their camping-place."

"Sleep well, all you people," said Sehinom Chabatu that night; "you
must be fresh to-morrow morning."

Next morning Hus was sent forward again, and the army started soon
after. They travelled all day. At sunset Hus came back and said,--

"I found the next camping-place; it is not far from here. Then I went
south a great way till I came to a hill which runs east and west. I
went to the top of that hill and looked down. On a broad flat I saw
fires and a great many people. Their camp is very wide from east to
west, and runs south as far as my eyes could see. Now, our friends, I
have seen the enemy; we must do the best we can."

When they reached the camping-place Sehinom said: "We will rest here
to-morrow, not travel till the next day."

On the second morning they rose and started early, went slowly,
resting occasionally. About sunset they came to the hill and camped on
the north side of it.

"I want to send some one to see how many people there are in that
camp," said Sehinom Chabatu.

Bulibok went. On the end of the ridge was a tree with one limb
sticking out toward the east. Bulibok went on that tree, sat on the
limb, and looked down. He saw the people moving around, playing, and
dancing. He could see a long distance. Pretty soon people below, who
were looking around everywhere, saw Bulibok, and one of them asked,--

"What is that sitting on the limb up there?"

"I don't know," answered another. "It looks like some person. Let us
throw at it and see if it will move."

Notudui Ulumus, who always wore a sling around his head, took it off,
put a stone in it, and said,--

"There must be some one there. I have never seen that thing on a limb
before."

"Oh, that is nothing; that is always there," said others.

"I have never seen anything there before. I will sling a stone at it."
Notudui hurled a stone, which just passed Bulibok's head; he didn't
move. Notudui hurled another stone, almost grazed Bulibok's nose, but
he never moved.

"Oh, that is a part of the limb," said some of the people: "it sticks
up in that way."

"A man would move if a stone came so near him," said others.

"That is somebody; that is somebody watching us," cried a third party;
and they disputed. The people watched for a while, but Bulibok sat
there as motionless as the limb till, tired of watching, they went
away, and forgot all about him. He slipped down from the tree then,
went home, and said,--

"I sat on a tree, saw everything, and know now the best way to go.
People saw me and hurled stones. They came near hitting me twice, but
I did not stir, and they let me go."

"Now, my people," said Sehinom Chabatu, "this war was not made by me.
I hate to take you to a place like that which is before us, but we
must go there. I will go first; I will go alone and look at the
place." He mounted the ridge, and from the top of it went underground
till he came out in the chief house of the enemy. Then, thrusting his
head up, he looked and saw a great many people. Soon someone saw him
and said,--

"Why do you people not watch? Sehinom Chabatu may come. You say that
he is dead--that you burned him to death in the sweat-house; but I
don't believe that you killed him."

"Oh, he is dead long ago. We killed him; we burned him!"

Sehinom stuck out his head a second time. Again some one saw him and
asked,--

"What is that over there? Maybe it is Sehinom Chabatu. I think he
might come."

"Oh, he is dead long ago. Let's throw at that and see what it is."

Some one hurled a stone. It grazed Sehinom's nose and he dropped into
the ground. "That is only a squirrel!" said a number of people,
"Sehinom Chabatu is dead."

Sehinom went back to his army, and said to Nom Sowiwi,--

"I saw a great many people. They are the same who killed our friends.
They will kill us unless we kill them. We will move to-morrow at
daybreak and fight. My brother, Tede Wiu, you must find Sutunut. When
he came to my place he boasted greatly. He said that I could fight
nobody. I want to see Sutunut. We must find him. Never mind others.
Let us find Sutunut and Koip Herit, who boasted that they had killed
so many of our people."

"I will go and look at that camp before dark," said Hau Herit.

He went, and just below the hilltop he found a piece of a hollow
oak-tree as long as the height of a man; he walked slowly in this dry
trunk, his head just sticking above it, and of the same color. He
reached the top of the ridge and went down the south side a short
distance; there were no trees or brush there. As he stood looking
around, his eyes above the stump, some people called out below,--

"What is that on the hill? I have never seen that thing there before."

"I see nothing but a stump," answered others.

Hau was looking around everywhere, taking notice of everything.

"There is some one there," said another man.

"Oh, that's a stump. I've seen that there all the time."

"Well, let's sling a stone at it."

Notudui took his sling and hurled a stone. Hau lowered his head a
little. The stone hit the stump and made a loud noise.

"Oh, that's nothing. Don't you hear the noise? That's just a stump.
We'll throw again and be sure."

Hau was just putting his head out when he saw another stone coming.
The stone hit the stump, and made a great noise.

"There, do you think that is a person? Do you think the stone would
make a noise like that if it hit some one?"

They threw no more stones. Hau waited till dark, when he went back and
told Sehinom everything.

"Now, my brothers," said Sehinom Chabatu to the two Tsudi boys, "you
must go to that camp. Go straight to the centre house, go into it
together. Then let one go west and the other east. Look carefully, and
when you see a bow, cut the string to it. Cut the strings in the first
house before you part, and then cut alone. Go into each house and cut
every bow-string. As you go around the houses inside, some one may see
you and say, 'Look at those Tsudis,' but pay no heed, go on cutting."

The two Tsudi brothers went to the middle house together; then one
went east, and the other west. They went through each house. In some
they found a few bows, in others a great many. They cut till daylight
was coming. They went home then, and said,--

"We cut bow-strings all night, and had to stop because daylight was
coming, but we left only a few strings uncut. The people slept, except
one man in the sweat-house. We don't think he ever sleeps. He talks
always."

"I know him," said Sehinom. "He talks, but he is asleep while he talks
[whistles]. Daylight is coming, we must go. Do the best you can, do
your best, all of you."

The army was so large, and there were so many Tidoks that they spread
over the country like a flood; they rushed across the hill and ran
down into the valley; when the people sleeping in the houses heard
them coming, they sprang up and ran for their bows.

"Oh, my bow-string is broken!" cried one.

"Oh, my bow-string is broken!" cried another.

"Give me a bow! Give me a bow!" cried a third.

This was heard all over the camp; every one was crying: "My bow-string
is broken! Give me a bow!"

Sehinom's army poured in on them like great waves of water. Sehinom
rushed to the chief house, and shouted,--

"Where are you, Sutunut? I want to see you. You boasted so much in Dau
Paki Olel, I want to see you. Where are you, Sutunut?"

Sutunut said nothing, kept still. He was in a house a short distance
away, and some one else killed him.

The southern people could not fight well without bows and arrows; they
did what they could to defend themselves, but at noon they were killed
to the last person, not one escaped.

Sehinom Chabatu with his chief men and all their forces started for
home, leaving Kot and Ho Herit behind, with some Tidoks to fire all
the houses. Just as they had set fire to everything, a new force of
southern people came up, surprised them, and killed a great many.

"Sehinom Chabatu has gone," said Ho Herit, when he saw them. "New
forces are coming against us. Now, Tidok people, you must fight well."

The new forces chased Ho Herit and his men. The Tidoks fought bravely.
Many were killed on both sides. Ho Herit himself was killed. Fresh
people from the south were coming continually, while the Tidoks had no
reinforcements. At last Kot Herit was killed, and most of the Tidoks
who fought under him. Then the southern people turned and went home.
The few Tidoks who escaped with their lives went north to their own
place.

Sehinom Chabatu went back to Dau Paki Olel and lived there. He and
those who came home with him did not know for a long time of the
second battle and the death of Kot and Ho Herit.

This is the end of that war. All the people who returned with Sehinom
Chabatu came home in safety. The first people fought no more after
that, for soon Olelbis turned them into birds, beasts, and other
things.




TULCHUHERRIS


PERSONAGES

After each name is given that of the creature or thing into which the
personage was changed subsequently.

=Hawt=, lamprey eel; =Kúlitek=, a white feather in the tail of =Komos
Kulit=, the black vulture; =Nomhawena=, an earthworm; =Pom Pokaila=,
earth old woman; =Sas=, sun; =Tichelis=, ground squirrel;
=Tulchuherris=, etymologically, a person or thing that has been dug
up; =Winishuyat=, foresight.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was not in the east, nor the north, nor the south, but in the west,
on a flat called Eli-Tsarauton (root flat), that a little old woman
lived very long ago. No person lived on that flat but this old woman,
whose name was Nomhawena Pokaila. She was called also Pom Pokaila.

This old woman had lived ten summers and ten winters on that flat, and
one summer more; she dug roots there all this time, for roots were her
food. The flat was broad, and she had dug, beginning at the edge and
going round and round, till at last there was only a small piece left
undug, and that was in the middle.

One morning, when she thrust her stick into the ground deeply, she
heard a cry like that of a little child. She stopped and listened;
heard the cry far down in the earth. She didn't know what to make of
it, but thought: "Whatever this is I will dig it out."

She thrust her root stick down as far as she could at one side of the
spot where the noise was, and worked hard, took much earth out; then
she heard the cry a little forward, and dug forward. She went next to
the opposite side and dug all around the cry, dug till the middle of
the afternoon, but found nothing. Then she dug around again, thrust
the stick deeper in the first spot, and said, "I must find that, I
must have it."

She thrust the stick down deeper,--got nothing. She went on the other
side, pushed the stick still deeper, and turned over the great lump of
earth that was in the middle. Under this she found a little boy. The
moment she saw him she heard a noise like thunder far off in the east,
at Saskewil, the place where Sas lives. When she raised him to the
surface, she heard this noise a second time.

The baby's head, as she raised him to the surface, was to the east,
his feet to the west; underground his head was to the south, and his
feet to the north.

"Tsok tso, tsok tso!" (good baby, good baby), said the old woman,
fondling him in her arms. She took the buckskin apron from her back,
laid it on the ground, put the little boy on it, and wrapped him up
carefully. Then she fondled him again, saying, "Tsok tso, tsok tso!"
and said, "I am old, I am your grandmother;" and she carried him to
her house. She took water and washed him, washed all his body. Every
morning she washed him. She could not sleep at night, she was so
anxious. She watched him all the time. All night, all day she
watched, never put him on the ground, but washed him much, saying,--

"I wish you to grow quickly. You are the only person seen here. I wish
you to walk soon."

In five weeks after she had found him he could walk a little and talk
some. When he was able to talk well, the old woman said,--

"Now, my grandson, I will tell you a thing which you must remember.
When you play around outside the house, never go to the east, never go
toward Saskewil, where Sas lives. Play in the north or the south or
the west, but never go east."

The boy grew fast and was able to play. As his grandmother was telling
him always not to go east, he said to himself,--

"I wonder why my grandmother tells me not to go east. I'd like to know
why."

One morning the boy went to play, went south from the house a short
distance, and heard a voice, heard some one shouting, calling from
some place, he didn't know where this voice was. He listened, and soon
heard it a second time. It came from above, from the sky. He saw no
one, but the voice said,--

"Little boy, your name is Tulchuherris. I know you, Tulchuherris. You
are the first person in this place, the greatest. You must do what you
can to live. You must do your best to conquer. You are Tulchuherris."

The boy heard and understood. He went home, but said nothing to his
grandmother, said nothing of that voice in the sky that had called
him.

She told him again, as before, not to go east. She told him this many
times. Now he was almost a young man, he had grown so fast. It was
nearly spring, and the old woman talked to him seriously. When he had
been with her all the winter, she said:

"My grandson, I suppose you wish to know something. I am going to talk
to you. You will soon be full grown. I will let you know why I have
told you so often not to go east. You wished to know why, now I will
tell you.

"A long time ago all my people--my son, my brother, my relatives--went
away off to the east and never came back again. I was left here alone.
There is a great house off in the east there, called Saskewil. A big
old man, Sas, with his wife and two daughters, live in it. All my kin
went to that place and were killed there. When any one goes into
Saskewil, the old woman, Sas's wife, sits on the east of the door,
which is open to the south; her daughters sit on the west side. The
old woman sits with her back toward the wall and her face to the
north. She never looks backward, but when a visitor is inside a while
and is sitting, she turns slowly, puts her hands to each side of her
eyes, bringing her finger-tips to meet in the middle of her forehead,
and glares with big eyes at the stranger. He looks at her then and
drops dead. There is a power in her eyes that kills him. Sas has
something in his nose. He takes this, rolls it on his knee, and snaps
it at people who go to his house. Nobody sees him do this, but he
kills many people in that way.

"Now, my grandson, you know why I do not wish you to go east. I will
tell you more. There was a man, the best of my people; he went to
Saskewil, he went to the east and was killed there. I am sorry for
him, I grieve for him yet. I am mourning now for him. He was your own
brother, the one that I grieve most of all for. He was my grandson.
His name was Kulitek Herit. You are large now, strong enough to hear
this, and I tell you."

After the old woman had told him of the people who had died in going
to Saskewil, Tulchuherris answered,--

"I am sorry for my brother. I am sorry that he was killed. Now, my
grandmother, I must see what I can do."

He went out of the house then, went west and found a kind of white
wood, brought it home and made an arrow,--a smooth, very small arrow;
he painted this arrow red, blue, and black, painted it on the end and
fastened feathers to it. Then he made a bow of wood which he found in
the same place, far away west, and painted it nicely on the outer
side.

Next morning before daylight, he went a short distance to the south
from his grandmother's, took his bow and arrow, strung the bow and
shot his arrow toward the east.

After the little arrow had left the bow it became a humming-bird as it
went through the air. Before the bird reached Sas's house it turned to
an arrow again.

A little way from Saskewil old Sas had his sweat-house with only one
door to it. That door looked toward the south. The arrow dropped east
of the door and stuck fast in the ground there. It dropped before
daybreak, while Sas was in the sweat-house. He heard something fall
outside the door, something that struck the ground with weight like a
great rock. He knew not what to think. He had never heard such a noise
before.

When daylight came old Sas rose and went out of the sweat-house. He
had slept all the night there. He looked around to see what had made
the great noise, and saw the little arrow. He looked at the arrow,
went up, grasped it, tried to pull it out. He took a firm hold, tried
hard, twisted and pulled, but could not draw the arrow. He rested and
then did his best. He pulled, braced himself. His hands slipped and he
fell on his back.

Sas had to leave the arrow where it was; he could not draw it out. He
went to his house, where his wife and daughters were. The two girls
were very beautiful. Sas took his old wooden pipe, filled it with
tobacco, and began to smoke.

"My old woman," said he, "and my daughters, I will tell you what I
have seen just now. I have seen a thing such as I have not seen for a
long time, a very long time. Long ago I used to see things such as I
have seen just now outside my sweat-house. Something must be wrong.
Some one must be thinking of us, some one must be thinking of our
house. I believe that some day soon we shall see some person coming. I
saw a little arrow, and tried to pull it out of the ground, but I was
not able. I tried till I fell and hurt my back. Now, my daughters, you
may go if you wish, and look at that arrow."

The girls went out, they looked at the arrow, and said, "Oh, that is a
nice arrow;" and they tried to pull it out of the ground. It did not
come, and they went back to their father's house.

"Now, my grandmother," said Tulchuherris in Eli Tsarauton, "I am going
to leave you. I am going away. I am going to the east. I am going to
Saskewil."

The old woman did not like to lose her grandson.

"Oh, my grandson," said she, "you will be killed. You will never come
back to me."

"My grandmother, I am going," said Tulchuherris. "I am going, for I
must go, and I will do the best I can."

He went west, and found flint, put pieces of it on each finger, made
finger-nails of it, and made them very sharp. Then he went west a
second time, got the marrow of Hunhunut (no one knows now what
creature Hunhunut is), brought home the marrow, rubbed it between his
hands, then rubbed himself with it, face, head, all his body except
his legs.

A third time he went west, and took a little bush full of thorns, each
about an inch and a half long, made leggings and a shirt of this
thorn-bush. A fourth time he went west, and picked out in a gulch the
firmest green water-stone. Of this green stone he made shoes. A fifth
time he went west, and took a western panther as dog. A sixth time he
went, and took a northern fox as dog. A seventh time he went west, got
a sky spear pole, and a sky spear head, and a sky strap for the spear
pole.

The old woman had a Winishuyat hidden away, and when she could not
stop her grandson from going she gave him this Winishuyat, which he
tied in under his hair on the top of his head. The hair was gathered
over it and tied so that no one could untie it but Tulchuherris, and
no one could see Winishuyat, who was like a little man, as big as a
thumb. Winishuyat could talk to Tulchuherris and tell him everything,
warn him of every danger. He always called him "my brother." When
Tulchuherris was ready, he said,--

"My grandmother, I must go, and you will stay here while I am gone."

He stood up then to start, and his grandmother said,--

"My grandson, I cannot go out for wood, I am too old, I am too weak. I
am not able to bring wood, and my fire will die."

Tulchuherris put down his quiver with his bow and went to the forest.
He pulled up many of the biggest trees by the roots and bound them in
a bundle. He brought the bundle to the house, put the trees on the
fire, and said,--

"Now you have plenty of firewood, my grandmother, and I am going."

When he had gone a little way the old woman screamed: "My grandson,
come back; the fire is dying!"

He put down his quiver and bow near his two dogs, went back, and saw
that the fire was dying. The whole great bundle of trees which he had
brought was burned out. Tulchuherris went then and pulled up by the
roots great trees, larger than the first, and brought two bundles; put
these on the fire--a great many trees. He was the strongest person in
the world, and could do that.

"Now I am going!" said he. His two dogs stood waiting at the bow and
the quiver. He had gone farther than the first time, he had gone about
twice as far, when the old woman screamed,--

"My grandson, the fire is out!"

Tulchuherris put down his quiver and bow again, left the dogs with
them, and hurried back. He found every tree burned and the fire going
out. He stood there and thought and thought. At last he said,--

"I don't know what to do. I can't find wood enough, and I can't leave
my grandmother without a fire."

Then Winishuyat said,--

"Tulchuherris, if you don't know how to keep a fire for your
grandmother, I will tell you. Go out here anywhere. You will find wild
sunflower roots, plenty of them. Put one handful of those roots on the
fire, and it will not go out again."

Tulchuherris went and dug the roots; brought two handfuls; put them on
the fire so that they would burn slowly, the ends touching the fire.
Then he said,--

"I am going, grandmother. Take good care of yourself."

He went to where his quiver and bow and dogs were; then he looked
back. His grandmother said nothing. She did not call to him this time.
He went farther, looked back, listened, no call came. He went still
farther, listened, all was silent; went farther yet, stopped,
listened, heard nothing, made up his mind that all was right with his
grandmother, and went on till he had gone a long distance, listened a
fourth time, heard nothing. After this he went quickly till about
midday, when he looked ahead and saw a great rock standing straight up
in front of him, small at the top and very high. He looked and saw
some one standing on the very summit. The rock was higher than a big
pine-tree. A very old man was standing on the top of it.

Tulchuherris could go neither to the north nor the south, the rock was
straight in his road. He looked everywhere for a passage, but could
see none. He looked on the left side, all was dark; on the right, all
was dark,--dark everywhere. There was light only in the road which
went up the rock and over it.

The old man on the rock, when Tulchuherris came near, called out,--

"My grandson, come right up to me; there is no other road where people
travel. When you are here, you will pass down on the other side
easily."

"I will go to you," said Tulchuherris.

When he had said "I will go to you," Winishuyat, the little man under
his hair, said,--

"My brother, be careful, he is going to kill you."

Tulchuherris stopped.

"Here," said Winishuyat, "is the place where our people came in time
past. Many were killed here. They went to the old man; he threw them
down and killed them. If you go to that old man, my brother, he will
sway this big rock. In one flash he will throw you into a dark place
at the side where you cannot see bottom. Run to the rock quickly, kick
it. If not, he will kill us. This old man was sent here by Sas, he was
sent here to kill us."

Tulchuherris did not climb the rock, did not go to the old man; but he
rushed forward and gave the rock one great kick with his shoe of green
water-stone. The rock fell, and the old man fell with it,--fell into
the dark place. The rock never sprang back. It left a smooth road with
a ridge on each side of the place where it had been. Then the two dogs
ran forward, and Tulchuherris said to the old man,--

"Hereafter you will not be what you have been; hereafter you will be
nothing but a ground squirrel. You will live under rocks in the earth,
and the people to come will call you tichelis. You are not like me; I
am strong. You will be nothing hereafter but a poor little ground
squirrel."

Tulchuherris followed the dogs then. He looked back and listened; he
could hear at a great distance, he could hear all over the world. But
he heard no sound from his grandmother; so he went on till he came to
a large and broad river. There he saw a man standing. Tulchuherris
went nearer, looked up and down, but could see no place to cross the
river. The man saw him and said,--

"Grandson, you cannot pass this big river; you must get some one to
help you. I am the only one who ever crosses at this point. I can wade
right through the water. I carry over all who come here. If you wish,
I will take you to the other side; but you could never go alone; you
could never cross yourself."

Tulchuherris didn't know what to do, and stood thinking.

"Go on, my brother," said Winishuyat. "Let him carry you, though this
is one of the places where they killed many of our people who escaped
the old man on the rock. But this man cannot kill us. Let him carry
us."

"Very well!" said Tulchuherris to the old man. "Carry me over, take me
across this river."

The old man came up and took him on his back. Tulchuherris had a
pointed bone in his bosom where he could get at it quickly. He had
brought this bone from Eli Tsarauton. The old man started into the
river. At first it was not deep, but in the middle of the stream the
water was up to his breast, and was growing deeper. Then it reached
his neck, and was rising. The dogs made a leap from one side of the
river to the other. The water was at the man's eyes now.

"Be careful, my brother," said Winishuyat, "be careful. This man
kills people in this way,--he drowns them, he will drown you right
away if you let him."

Tulchuherris took out his sharp bone, stabbed the man's breast two or
three times with it, wounded him, stopped him. Then he leaped from the
man's head to the other bank, where his dogs were. Tulchuherris stood
a moment looking at the wounded man. Then he said,--

"Hereafter you will not be what you have been. You will be nothing but
an eel. You will be a person no longer. You will be only an eel, the
people to come will call you hawt and will eat you."

Tulchuherris walked forward quickly after this. Sas's two daughters
heard every step he took, as though he had been near, though he was
far, very far away from them. They always heard men coming from the
west,--always knew when they were coming.

Tulchuherris walked quickly till almost evening, when he came to a
high ridge near Sas's house. Just as he reached the ridge he heard a
sort of clinking noise on the other side. He stopped and looked, but
saw no one. He was right at the spot where the noise was, but there
was no one in sight. The ridge was like a straight wall reaching north
and south farther than he could see, and high up out of sight, and
down into the ground. No one could go through, or go around, or dig
under that wall or climb over it. In the middle of the ridge was an
opening in which stood a great sugar pine, and in the pine was a
cleft large enough to let a person pass easily. When any one was
passing, and half-way through the cleft, the pine closed and crushed
him. The noise was made by a person hammering just beyond the wall.
Tulchuherris looked through and saw an arm, and while he was looking
his dogs sprang through the opening to the other side.

"What's this?" called the man, and he walked to the opening. "Ah, are
you there? Is that you, my son-in-law?"

Tulchuherris said nothing, but looked and saw piles of bones inside.

"Come right in this way, come in, my son-in-law," said the old man.
"Come in; you cannot pass at another place."

When the old man called out, "Come in, you cannot pass at another
place," Tulchuherris said, "I must pass here, but I am afraid."

"This is the road that all people take, my son-in-law. Come straight
through; have no fear, there is no danger."

The two dogs went up to the old man and smelled him. They growled, did
not like him, nor did the old man like the dogs. This old man was Sas
himself, he who lived in Saskewil.

"Now, my brother," said Winishuyat, "go ahead, go through as quickly
as you can. If you are slow, he will catch us. This is a place where
Sas has killed many of our people."

Tulchuherris took his bow and quiver in one hand, stood on one foot,
braced himself sidewise, made a spring, and went through in a flash.
That instant the tree closed with a great noise, became solid.

When Tulchuherris shot through, he went far off into the field, and
Sas didn't see him, he went past so swiftly. Sas heard the tree close,
and thought that Tulchuherris was caught in it. He looked at the tree
and began to talk.

"Well, my son-in-law, you are caught, now you are nobody. I am Sas.
You were weak, I am strong. You wore your grandmother's apron. You
knew nothing; I know everything."

Tulchuherris had come up, and was standing behind while old Sas was
talking. He listened, heard every word. After Sas had stopped talking,
Tulchuherris asked,--

"My father-in-law, to whom are you talking? What are you saying?"

"Ha!" cried Sas, turning quickly. "Son-in-law, I was talking to
myself. I was saying that I had done wrong to my son-in-law. I am old,
my heart is weak, my head is half crazy. I am blind, I did not know
what I was doing. I was saying that I had done wrong. You are my
son-in-law. I am old, I am weak, I am blind. My head is gray. I cannot
do much now. You see my house over there; it is a poor house; it is
poor because I am old. Go ahead; go in. I will follow as soon as I
can."

Tulchuherris went ahead, and Sas followed slowly at a distance. The
dogs had run on, and were at the house already. On one side of the
door outside were ten grizzly bears, and ten on the other side. There
were rattlesnakes in the door and around it. Before Tulchuherris came
the panther dog had killed all the bears, and the fox dog all the
snakes and things poisonous. When he came near the house, he stood a
little way off and looked at his dogs. All around Sas's house he saw
great piles of bones lying about everywhere, the bones of his kindred.
He began to cry and lament for them.

When the dogs had cleared the way outside, they went into the house
and killed all the grizzlies and rattlesnakes there; the house was
full of them. Tulchuherris stood outside, crying over the bones of his
people. When he had cried enough, he went in. Old Sas's wife was
sitting on the east side of the door and his daughters on the west.
When they saw Tulchuherris, the girls spread a mat, sat on it, and
told him to sit down between them.

"Now, my brother," said Winishuyat, "be careful of that old woman;
many of our people have been killed by her. If they were not killed
outside, she turned and looked at them, and they fell dead when they
saw her eyes."

While Tulchuherris was sitting with Sas's daughters, a large,
long-legged, red-backed, very venomous spider came on him; then
another and another. Many of these spiders crawled over him. He was
wearing his thorn shirt, and they could not poison him; they got
impaled on the thorns and died, every one.

Old Sas came at last, and when he walked into the house he took his
pipe, filled it with tobacco, and drew a few whiffs of smoke. Then he
said,--

"Take a smoke, my son-in-law; we cannot do without a pipe. It is best
to smoke first and talk of affairs after that."

Tulchuherris took the pipe and pretended to smoke. He was not smoking;
still smoke came, and the tobacco burned out. He gave the pipe back to
Sas. Sas's tobacco was made of people's flesh and of their bones
pounded fine.

After Tulchuherris had given back the pipe, he took his beautiful
quiver, put in his hand, and took out his own pipe of green
water-stone, a solid piece, not very big, but tremendously heavy. He
took his own tobacco and put it into the pipe. His tobacco was the
same kind of marrow that he had rubbed on his face, and something
mixed with it (it is not known what that was). Tulchuherris lighted
the pipe, smoked a little, and said,--

"Here, my father-in-law, take a smoke. I am only a young man. You are
old, you are wise, you know everything. You say it is best for us to
take a smoke. I am young, do not know much, but I think this pipe and
tobacco are for talk. Smoke with me."

Sas took the pipe, but when Tulchuherris let go the old man could not
hold it. It was slipping and falling. When he tried to catch it, it
fell on his arm, threw him, and held him down.

Sas struggled to push the pipe off his arm, but had not strength
enough. Tulchuherris looked for a moment, then reached out his hand,
picked up the pipe, and asked,--

"Father-in-law, what is the matter? Take a good smoke. This is
Tulchuherris's pipe."

Sas could not lift the pipe. Tulchuherris held it while the old man
was smoking. When Sas drew in the smoke and swallowed it, it hurt him
inside. The old man was choking. He fell on the ground, fell almost
into the fire. His breath was taken from him. Tulchuherris put the
pipe aside.

"Oh, help me up, help me, my son-in-law," called Sas.

Tulchuherris helped him to rise, and then sat with the girls again.

"My old father, Sas," said his elder daughter, "what is the matter?
You have wanted this long time to see a man with strong arms. Why not
talk now with this one? You have been waiting a long time for such a
man."

While they were sitting there, Winishuyat said: "My brother, look out
for the old woman. She is going to turn--be on your guard!"

Tulchuherris was ready. The old woman had not looked around since he
came. She had been sitting motionless. Now she began to turn slowly,
and Tulchuherris watched her. He sat with his right hand doubled up,
and before she could look into his eyes he snapped two flint
finger-nails at her, sent one nail into each of her eyes and put it
out. She fell dead and rolled into the fire.

Night came now, and Tulchuherris lay down on the bed prepared by Sas's
two daughters. They took their places, one on each side of him.

He never took out Winishuyat, he never let any one know of him. As
Tulchuherris lay on his back, he saw something over his head, hanging
from the roof of the house. Two obsidian knives were hanging together
by a very slender string of the inner bark of maple. Tulchuherris fell
asleep and slept until midnight. He was roused then by Winishuyat, who
said to him,--

"Oh, my brother, wake up. The string holding the knives is ready to
break. Wake up, my brother, wake up!"

Tulchuherris woke up.

"Turn over! turn over!" said Winishuyat.

Tulchuherris turned in a flash. That instant the knives fell, struck
the ground just at his back, and were broken to pieces, both knives at
once.

This was another way of killing people. Strangers always slept soundly
on that bed with Sas's daughters, were struck while asleep by two
knives in the heart, and died the same moment.

Next morning after the knives fell, Sas rose and said,--

"Rise up, my son-in-law. I have a small sweat-house out here. I go
there to sweat every morning, and then to the river to swim. I swim in
the river every morning. We will sweat, and then swim."

Sas went ahead, he was first in the sweat-house. He made a very hot
fire of the bones of people whom he had killed,--there were piles of
those bones around everywhere. Tulchuherris went out of Saskewil into
the sweat-house.

"Now, my brother," said Winishuyat, when they were at one side in the
sweat-house, "this is the place where Sas has killed many people who
escaped in the house. He will smoke you to death if he can."

The sweat-house was built of bones, and was plastered outside with
mucus from Sas's nose, so that no smoke could escape through the
cracks. After Tulchuherris went in he saw how Sas made the fire. The
old man never used wood, always bones. He piled on bones; fat and
marrow came out of them, blazed up, made a great smoke, and the smell
of the smoke was not pleasant. After sweating for a while Sas said,--

"I am old now and weak, nearly blind. I cannot stand much. My head
aches. I must go out to rest. Stay here you and take a good sweat.
When you have finished, come out."

Old Sas went out. The door was small, he could barely crawl through
it. When outside, he lay across the door and stopped the passage with
his body, so that no one could go out and no smoke could escape. After
a time Tulchuherris said,--

"My father-in-law, I should like to go out. Go from the door, let me
pass, I have sweated enough."

"Oh, I am old and weak," answered Sas. "I am lying here to rest. When
I have rested some, my son-in-law, I will rise and let you out."

Tulchuherris was silent a little while longer. Then he groaned, "Oh,
I'm nearly dead!"

"My brother," asked Winishuyat, "do you want to die? Do you want old
Sas to kill you, to smoke you to death? You have no wish to die, I do
not want to die. We are strong people, stronger than Sas. I will tell
you how to go out. Take that Chirchihas bone which you have and make a
hole in the north side of the sweat-house."

Tulchuherris made a hole in the wall of the sweat-house. He spat then
and spoke to the spittle. "Make noise for an hour," said he, "and
groan just as I do--'enh, enh, enh!' Let Sas believe that I am here,
that I am dying."

Tulchuherris slipped out through the hole, walked to the river, swam
there, washed himself clean, went back to Saskewil, and sat down with
his two wives, Sas's daughters. Sas heard the groaning of the spittle
inside and said to himself, "Tulchuherris is dying."

After a long time the noise stopped, and Sas said, "Tulchuherris is
dead." Then he went to the river, washed himself, and walked along
slowly toward the house. When he came near, he was saying,--

"Tulchuherris, you are nobody. I have finished you now. I am wiser
than you, stronger than you. You were brought up in your grandmother's
apron."

Tulchuherris heard him. When Sas was outside the door, he stood a
while and talked on,--

"You were dug out of the ground, Tulchuherris," said he. "You are
nobody. I have beaten you. You'll never trouble me again."

He started to go into the house, looked around, and saw Tulchuherris
sitting with his two daughters.

"Father-in-law, were you talking of me? What were you saying?" asked
Tulchuherris, when Sas had come in and sat down.

"Oh, my son-in-law, I cannot tell what I said, but I was thinking,
'Oh, I am so old, I know nothing. I am weak, I am blind. Sometimes I
do not know what I am doing. I think that I have done wrong to my
son-in-law, my poor son-in-law.'"

Soon after Sas went out, and at one side near the door he dug a grave
for the old woman, his wife. When he had dug it, he buried her and
with her all the bears and snakes, and said, "These are my children."
He put them in the same grave, and cried, singing as he cried,--

          "Koki, koki, koki nom,
          Koki, koki, koki nom."
    (Creeping, creeping, creeping west,
    Creeping, creeping, creeping west.)

While he was burying his wife and the bears and the snakes, he had
beaver teeth hanging on strings at the back of his head and on each
side of his face. After he had cried awhile he danced and sang, and
these teeth rattled as his head swayed from side to side. Then he went
into the house, sat down, looked at Tulchuherris, and said,--

"Tulchuherris, you are my son-in-law; your wives, those two women, are
my daughters. There are some things which they have wanted to play
with this long time, and they have begged me to go for them, but I am
old and blind; if I were to go I could not get what they ask for. My
daughters want pets. My son-in-law, on a small tree, not far from
this house, is a nest, and young woodpeckers chirp every day in it.
Your wives want these red-headed woodpeckers, but I am blind and old;
I cannot climb the tree, but you can get the woodpeckers. I will show
the nest."

"Go ahead," said Tulchuherris, "show me the nest."

The tree was a mile away. Sas went to it and stopped. Tulchuherris
stood near. Both looked up, and Sas asked, "Do you see the nest?"

The tree was very straight, and so high that they could hardly see the
top of it; the trunk was as smooth as ice.

"My father-in-law," said Tulchuherris. "I do not think that I can go
up there; I do not believe that I can climb the tree."

"You can climb it if I help you," said Sas, who took out a rope made
of single hairs tied end to end, a great many of them tied together,
hairs from the heads of his daughters. He threw the rope very high
over a limb near the nest, and said: "Now, my son-in-law, I will hold
the rope; you climb."

Tulchuherris began to climb the rope. He went up, up, up, till he
reached the limb and stood on it. Sas was on the ground, holding the
other end of the rope. When Tulchuherris let go his hold, Sas pulled
the rope down, and left Tulchuherris on the limb very high in the air.
Sas turned home. When a short distance he said,--

"Now, Tulchuherris, you are nobody. Your grandmother, Nomhawena, is
old. She dug you out of the ground with a root stick. You grew up in
her petticoat. You are not strong, you are not wise, you are only
Tulchuherris. I am Sas."

When Tulchuherris looked down he was terrified, it was so far to the
ground.

"My brother," said Winishuyat, "we shall get down. Lengthen the
pointed bone which you have, and go higher."

Tulchuherris went to the nest, looked in, and saw a great many heads
peeping out in every direction,--all heads of rattlesnakes. He looked
awhile; could not think what to do.

"Make the bone long," said Winishuyat. Tulchuherris stretched the
bone. "Stick the bone into the head of each snake and gather them all
on it."

Tulchuherris did this quickly; had them all; then he slipped them off
and let them drop to the earth. After that he sat on the limb and
thought: "What shall I do now?"

"My brother," said Winishuyat, "what are you thinking of? Why not try
to do something? Do you want to die? If you cannot think of a way to
escape, I will tell you a way."

"Tell me, my brother."

"Stretch your right hand toward the west. Something will come on it."

Tulchuherris stretched his hand toward the west, where his grandmother
was, and immediately something came with a whirr and a flutter, and
settled on his arm like a bird. It was a sky-strap, blue like the sky,
narrow, and very strong. He fastened one end of it to the limb,
knotting it in such a way that he could untie it with a jerk at the
other end. He slipped down on it, and when on the ground jerked it
loose. He strung the snakes on the long bone, they were all dead, and
carried them to Sas's house. He laid them at the door, went in, sat
down, and then said to the two women,--

"I have the woodpeckers if you wish to play with them. If you don't
want them, you can send your father to look at them."

The girls told Sas. He went to the snakes and cried out: "Oh, my
son-in-law, you are killing all my children." Sas buried them in the
old woman's grave, and cried, and sang the same song over them as over
his wife and the bears. Then he danced, wearing the beaver teeth.

Next morning old Sas rose first, and said: "My son-in-law, be up. My
daughters always want me to fish and hunt; but I cannot fish now, I
cannot hunt. I am old and weak. My feet are tender, I cannot walk; my
head is dizzy. But you are young, my son-in-law. You can do many
things. If you wish to hunt, I will show you where to find game in
plenty. When I was young, I used to go to that place and kill game of
every sort."

"I will go," said Tulchuherris.

When they were at the place, Tulchuherris saw only thick brush through
which no man could pass. There was only one narrow opening, one little
trail, and one tree at the end of it. "Stand against that tree," said
Sas. "When deer come, they always run past that tree. I will drive
deer in. You shoot."

Sas went north to drive deer in.

"Now, my brother," said Winishuyat, "be careful. You see the bones
around here. They are people's bones. When Sas could not kill people
elsewhere, he brought them to this place and killed them. He will
drive ten grizzly bears up to kill us, and eat us. Tell your panther
dog what to do."

"You, my dog," said Tulchuherris, "stand behind the tree till you see
a grizzly bear spring at me. I will dodge. He will miss and turn again
at me. Kill him when he turns."

Tulchuherris heard Sas driving bears in the distance. "Ha-ha, ho-ho!
Ha-ha, ho-ho!" shouted Sas.

"Be ready; they are coming!" said Winishuyat.

Tulchuherris heard Sas coming. Then he saw a grizzly, and another, and
another, till five were in sight. A little behind these were five
others. When the first bear came near, he bounded at Tulchuherris,
Tulchuherris dodged. The bear went past a good distance, and then
turned to spring back. That moment the panther dog seized him by the
throat and killed him. The second bear sprang at Tulchuherris. He
dodged; the bear passed, and turned to come back. The panther dog
seized and killed him right there. When he had chased the bears in,
Sas turned home, saying as he went,--

"You are in a good place to-day, Tulchuherris. I have you now where my
children will kill you. I know more than you; I am stronger than you.
I am Sas."

After ten bears were killed and no more came, Tulchuherris stood
awhile, and taking the bears in one hand by the paws, he walked home
with them; carried them as he would little birds. He put them at Sas's
door, went in, sat down, and said to his wives,--

"I have something outside. You call them deer, I give them another
name. But this is the only kind of deer that your father drove to me.
You eat this kind of deer, I suppose. Go and see them, or tell your
father to go."

Sas went out and saw the ten grizzly bears lying dead. "Oh, my
son-in-law," cried he, "you are killing all my children!" Then,
singing and crying, he buried the bears.

Next morning Sas rose early. "My son-in-law," said he, "there is
something which I would like you to do to-day. My daughters have been
asking me to do this for a long time; but I am too old. I will show
you a brush house. I made it to kill birds of every kind and all kinds
of game. It is near a spring at which birds meet to drink. Come; I
will show you the house and the spring."

"My brother, be careful to-day," said Winishuyat, at starting. "Sas is
taking us to Wintubos, where he has killed many people. There is no
water near that place; no spring; but the house is full of snakes,
poisonous things, and bears. Take both your dogs with you."

After Tulchuherris and Sas had gone a short distance, Sas stopped and
said,--

"My son-in-law, you see that little house down there? Go into it and
wait till you see some nice birds or game coming, then kill them. I
will go back. I am old and cannot stand or sit here and wait for you.
I will go home and lie down till you come."

Sas went home.

Tulchuherris went near the house, and stopped. The two dogs sprang
into the house at a leap, and killed all the snakes and the bears in
it. When the dogs had come out, Tulchuherris went in to look at the
house and the spring. He saw piles of bones everywhere. He cried when
he looked at them. There was no water in the spring. It was mud, thick
mud mixed with people's flesh. Tulchuherris looked toward the east,
and far away he saw an open plain. Soon he saw what seemed a small
speck at first. It was moving. As he watched, it came nearer, and he
saw it was a person. Now far away he saw something else. The first was
a small man; the second still smaller. Tulchuherris saw that they were
running toward him. They came near and stopped.

"Have no fear. Come up to me," said Tulchuherris.

The larger said: "O my brother, my brother, I am thirsty."

"Oh, my brother," said the smaller one, "we are very thirsty."

Their hair was clipped close to their heads. Tulchuherris stepped back
toward the north, struck the ground with his heel, and clear, cold
water sprang up in a stream. He drank himself, and said, "Come and
drink."

The first of these strangers was Anakurita (orphan), the second
Biahori (lone man); only these two were left of all people in those
parts. Sas had killed all the rest. "The last of our relatives were
killed at this spring," said they. "We alone are left. We are going
home."

"If you come here again," said Tulchuherris, "do not go near the
spring at the house. That is a bad place. Drink this good water which
I have given you."

The two went away. Tulchuherris put the sharp end of his bone through
the heads of the snakes which the dogs had killed, there were hundreds
of them. The ten grizzly bears he carried home in one hand.

"I have something outside," said he to Sas's daughters. "You call them
birds, I believe; they are all the birds that I found at the brush
house. Tell your father to look at them."

Sas went out and began to cry. He enlarged his wife's grave and buried
them. "These are my children," said he; and he sang and danced as
before.

Sas rose early next morning. "My son-in-law," said he, "your wives ask
me to get fish for them, but I am too old. When I was young I used to
fish, but now I cannot see. You are young; I will show you a good
place for trout. My old pole and spear points are there; you may use
them."

They started, came to a river with a bridge over it formed of one
hair. "My brother," said Winishuyat, "this is a place where Sas has
killed many of our people."

"My son-in-law," said Sas, "cross this bridge and catch fish; I will
go home."

"Very well," answered Tulchuherris, who put his foot on the end of the
bridge and crossed with one spring. On the other side he went to the
fishing-hut, fixed so that a man could look up and down the river
while fishing. Tulchuherris had his own spear-shaft, a sky-pole; the
string was a sky-strap. He had his own point, too.

He waited for fish, and at last saw something come slowly from the
south. It stopped, and then looked at him. Tulchuherris saw a face and
a head with long hair tied in a knot with a band of woodpeckers'
scalps, a long band wound around many times. Tulchuherris wore just
such a band, but the scalps were of mountain woodpeckers.

"Ah, my brother-in-law," called out the person in the water, "let us
exchange headdresses."

"I am sorry for you, my brother-in-law," said Tulchuherris. "I hate to
kill you, but I must, for my father-in-law sent me to kill you."

"Go ahead, go ahead," said Winishuyat. "Don't spare him. Sas says he
is a fish. He is Sas's son, Supchit. You must catch him or suffer."

Supchit turned, as it were, to go back. Tulchuherris hurled the pole,
speared him under the arm, and the point went through to his other
side. Supchit rushed toward the east with great force. Tulchuherris
held to the spear with one hand, grasped tule grass with the other,
used all his strength. Then he let the spear go, and held the strap.
Though strong, he could not stop Supchit. He was drawn into the water
to his waist, then to his breast, and at last to his chin.

"My brother," said Winishuyat, "do you wish to drown? Call your
gopher"--he had a gopher in his moccasin--"send him to fill up the
escapes, to block all the doors to Supchit's houses."

Tulchuherris sent his gopher to fill every hole, all Supchit's doors.
Sas was at home now. He heard the great struggle, and said,--

"Oh, Tulchuherris, my son will finish you. This is your last day."

The gopher stopped every opening, and Supchit went from place to
place. Every door was closed. He had to stay. Tulchuherris came out of
the water little by little, and pulled till he drew Supchit to the
bank, where he died. He carried him home in one hand, as if he had
been a small fish.

"My father-in-law," said Tulchuherris, "I saw no fish except one
little trout. I speared and brought home that little trout."

Sas went out; the two sisters went. "That is our brother!" cried they.
"That is my son," called out Sas, "the best son I had."

The old man buried Supchit with his head north, looking southward, and
sang the same song that he had sung for his wife and the grizzlies.
Sas and his daughters cut their hair in grief over Supchit.

"My son-in-law," said Sas, next morning early, "be up; I will show you
a place where I used to play often when I was young. I am old now, and
cannot play much, but I will show you the place, and I may play with
you a little."

"I will go," said Tulchuherris; and they started.

"Now, my brother," said Winishuyat, "we are going to the place where
Sas himself has always killed everyone who baffled him elsewhere. No
man has ever escaped from the place to which Sas is now taking you. He
will take you to a tree; he will ask you to climb it; he will bend it
and let it spring back again; he will kill you if you are not
careful."

They went to a very wide, level plain; in the middle of the plain
stood a tremendous, big pine-tree, leaning to one side somewhat.

"My son-in-law," said Sas, "when I was young I used to play here. I
cannot play much now, but I'll show you how to play."

"My brother," said Winishuyat, "I will tell you what to do. Sas will
try his best now to kill us. Do not kill him to-day; try him, lead him
on, make him go higher and higher on the tree, and wait till
to-morrow."

Sas climbed the tree some distance and said: "Now, my son-in-law, I am
ready!"

Tulchuherris seized the top of the tree, pulled it toward him a
little, and let it fly back. Sas kept his hold and slipped down.

"Now, my son-in-law, go up; go higher. I used to go very high when I
was young like you." Tulchuherris went to where Sas had been.

"Go higher," said Sas.

"I wanted to stay where you were," answered Tulchuherris; "but I will
go a little higher."

Sas took hold of the tree at the top, pulled it to the earth, and let
it go. It sprang back into the sky with a noise like thunder.
Tulchuherris held on and slipped down unhurt.

"Well, father-in-law," said Tulchuherris, "try again."

"I cannot go high," said Sas; "but I will go a little higher than I
did the first time. Don't give the tree a big pull." He went up.

"Go higher," said Tulchuherris.

"My son-in-law, I cannot go higher; I am old."

Tulchuherris teased him till he went a little higher; then he gave a
harder pull than before. Sas held on without trouble and slipped to
the ground.

"Now," said Sas, "I'll give you a swing." Tulchuherris went up.

"Go higher," said Sas. He went higher.

"Go higher; you are young," urged Sas.

"I don't like to go up," said Tulchuherris. But he went a little
higher.

Old Sas gave a good pull, stronger than before. Tulchuherris held on
and came to the ground safely. Going to one side, he said: "Whu, whu!
let this day be made short!" So the day was made short; evening came
soon.

"Well, father-in-law, you try now."

"Very well," said Sas, "give me a small pull; my arms tremble; I am
old. I cannot hold on, I am so weak." Old Sas went up.

"Go higher," said Tulchuherris.

"I cannot; I'm old."

Tulchuherris pulled down the top of the tree, but not so far. While
he was pulling, Sas said: "Oh, my son-in-law, don't let it go hard."

Tulchuherris gave a pull that would leave Sas on the tree, and he came
down unhurt.

"Now try once more," said Sas, "and we will go home."

"Very well," answered Tulchuherris.

"Now, my brother," said Winishuyat, "this is the last time to-day. He
will try hard to kill you. Jump off before he lets the tree go."

Tulchuherris went up two-thirds of the way. Sas pulled the tree to the
ground and thought that he would kill Tulchuherris surely; but just
before he let it go, Tulchuherris slipped off behind him and rushed
away. The tree flew up with the noise of heavy thunder. Sas looked
everywhere, but could not see Tulchuherris.

"Now, Tulchuherris," said he, "I have finished you at last. You are
nobody, you are dead;" and he started to go home, talking to himself
as he went.

"Father-in-law, what are you saying, to whom are you talking?"

Sas turned around, amazed. "Oh, my son-in-law, I am glad that you are
here. We must go home. We have no wood; we must get wood."

Tulchuherris thought: "My father-in-law wants to kill me. To-morrow I
will do what I can to kill him. When my grandmother spoke to me of
Sas, I knew nothing; I paid no heed to her. When she warned me, I did
not listen, I did not believe; but I see now that she spoke truly when
she told me of Sas's house."

He rose in the night, turned toward Sas, and said: "Whu! whu! I want
you, Sas, to sleep soundly."

Then he reached his right hand toward the west, toward his
grandmother's, and a stick came on it. He carved and painted the stick
beautifully, red and black, and made a fire-drill. Then he reached his
left hand toward the east, and wood for a mokos (arrow-straightener)
came on it. He made the mokos and asked the fox dog for a fox-skin.
The fox gave it. Of this he made a headband and painted it red. All
these things he put in his quiver.

"We are ready," said Tulchuherris. "Now, Daylight, I wish you to come
right away, to come quickly."

Daylight came. Sas rose, and they started soon after for the tree.

"My son-in-law, I will go first," said Sas; and he climbed the tree.

"Go higher!" said Tulchuherris. "I will not give a great pull, go up
higher."

He went high, and Tulchuherris did not give a hard pull. Sas came down
safely.

Tulchuherris now went high, almost to the top. Sas looked at him, saw
that he was near the top, and then drew the great pine almost to the
earth, standing with his back to the top of the tree. Tulchuherris
sprang off behind Sas and ran away into the field. The tree sprang
into the sky with a roar.

"You are killed now, my son-in-law," said Sas. "You will not trouble
me hereafter!" He talked on to himself, and was glad.

"What are you saying, father-in-law?" asked Tulchuherris, coming up
from behind.

Sas turned. "Oh, my son-in-law, I was afraid that I had hurt you. I
was sorry."

"Now, my brother," said Winishuyat, "Sas will kill you unless you kill
him. At midday he will kill you surely, unless you kill him. Are we
not as strong as Sas?"

"Father-in-law, try again; then I will go to the very top and beat
you," said Tulchuherris.

That morning Sas's elder daughter said to her sister, after Sas and
Tulchuherris had gone,--

"My sister, our father Sas has tried all people, and has conquered all
of them so far; but to-day he will not conquer, to-day he will die. I
know this; do not look for him to-day, he will not come back; he will
never come back to us."

Sas went up high. "I will kill him now," thought Tulchuherris, and he
was sorry; still he cried: "Go a little higher; I went higher, I will
go to the top next time. I will not hurt you, go a little higher."

Sas went higher and higher, till at last he said, "I cannot climb any
more, I am at the top; don't give a big pull, my son-in-law."

Tulchuherris took hold of the tree with one hand, pulled it as far as
it would bend, pulled it till it touched the earth, and then let it
fly. When the tree rushed toward the sky, it made an awful noise, and
soon after a crash was heard, a hundred times louder than any thunder.
All living things heard it. The whole sky and earth shook. Olelbis,
who lives in the highest place, heard it. All living things said,--

"Tulchuherris is killing his father-in-law. Tulchuherris has split
Sas."

The awful noise was the splitting of Sas.

Tulchuherris stood waiting, waited three hours, perhaps, after the
earth stopped trembling: then, far up in the sky he heard a voice,
saying,--

"Oh, my son-in-law, I am split, I am dead. I thought that I was the
strongest power living; but I am not. From this time on I shall say
Tulchuherris is the greatest power in the world."

Tulchuherris could not see any one. He only heard a voice far up in
the sky, saying,--

"My son-in-law, I will ask you for a few things. Will you give me your
fox-skin headband?"

Tulchuherris put his hand into his fox-skin quiver, took out the band,
and tossed it to him. It went straight up to Sas, and he caught it.
"Now will you give me your mokos?" Tulchuherris took out the mokos and
threw it. "Give me your fire-drill!" He threw that.

Another voice was heard now, not so loud: "I wish you would give me a
headband of white quartz." This voice was the smaller part of Sas.

When Tulchuherris had given the headband, he said,--

"My father-in-law, you are split--you are two. The larger part of you
will be Sas [the sun], the smaller part Chanahl [the moon, the white
one]; and this division is what you have needed for a long time, but
no one had the strength to divide you. You are in a good state now.
You, Chanahl, will grow old quickly and die; then you will come to
life and be young again. You will be always like that in this world.
And, Sas, you will travel west all the time, travel every day without
missing a day; you will travel day after day without resting. You will
see all things in the world as they live and die. My father-in-law,
take this, too, from me."

Tulchuherris threw up to Sas a quiver made of porcupine skin.

"I will take it," said Sas, "and I will carry it always."

Then Tulchuherris gave Chanahl the quartz headband and said,--

"Wear it around your head always so that when you travel in the night
you will be seen by all people."

Sas put the fox-skin around his head, and fastened the mokos crosswise
in front of his forehead. The fire-drill he fastened in his hair
behind, placing it upright. At sunrise we see the hair of the fox-skin
around Sas's head before we see Sas himself.

Next Tulchuherris threw up two red berries, saying,--

"Take these and make red cheeks on each side of your face, so that
when you rise in the morning you will be bright, and make everything
bright."

Tulchuherris went west and got some white roots from the mountain,
threw them to Sas, and said, "Put these across your forehead."

Next he stretched his right hand westward, and two large shells, blue
inside, came to his palm. He threw these to Sas and said,--

"Put these on your forehead for a sign when you come up in the
morning. There is a place in the east which is all fire. When you
reach that place, go in and warm yourself. Go to Olelpanti now.
Olelbis, your father, lives there. He will tell you where to go."

Sas went to Olelpanti, where he found a wonderful and very big
sweat-house. It was toward morning, and Olelbis was lying down,
covered with a blanket. While sleeping he heard a noise, and when he
woke he saw some one near him. He knew who it was. Sas turned to him
and said,--

"My father, I am split. I thought myself the strongest person in the
world, but I was not. Tulchuherris is the strongest."

"Well, my son Sas," asked Olelbis, "where do you wish to be, and how
do you wish to live?"

"I have come to ask you," replied Sas.

"Well," answered Olelbis, "you must travel all the time, and it is
better that you go from east to west. If you go north and travel
southward, I don't think that will be well. If you go west and travel
eastward, I don't think that will be well, either. If you go south and
travel northward, I don't think that will be right.

"I think that best which Tulchuherris told you. He told you to go east
and travel to the west. He said that there is a hot place in the east,
that you must go into that place and get hot before you start every
morning. I will show you the road from east to west. In a place right
south of this is a very big tree, a tobacco tree, just half-way
between east and west. When you come from the east, sit down in the
shade of that tree, rest a few minutes, and go on. Never forget your
porcupine quiver or other ornaments when you travel.

"While coming up from the east, you will see thick brush along the
road on both sides. In that brush are the grizzly bears, your
children. Be on your guard against them; they would kill you if they
could. As you pass along, let your porcupine quiver touch the bushes;
that will keep the bears away. When you go far west to the great
water, jump into it; everybody will call that place Sasunhluaston. No
one in the world will believe you except Sedit. You and Sedit want all
things to die when they grow old. Go to the east; go into the hot
place every morning. There is always a fire in it. Take a white oak
staff, thrust the end of that staff into the fire till it is one
glowing coal. When you travel westward carry this burning staff in
your hand. In summer take a manzanita staff; put it in the fire, and
burn the end. This staff will be red-hot all the day.

"Now you may go east and begin. You will travel all the time, day
after day, without stopping. All living things will see you with your
glowing staff. You will see everything in the world, but you will be
always alone. No one can ever keep you company or travel with you. I
am your father and you are my son, but I could not let you stay with
me."




SEDIT AND THE TWO BROTHERS HUS


PERSONAGES

After each name is given that of the beast, bird, or thing into which
the personage was changed subsequently.

=Dokos=, flint; =Hus=, turkey buzzard; =Klak=, rattlesnake; =Sedit=,
coyote; =Wima=, grizzly bear.

       *       *       *       *       *

There were two brothers Hus in Olelpanti, and Olelbis had given them a
place in his sweat-house. Now, when Olelbis had made up his mind to
send all things down to the earth, the people in Olelpanti were
talking and saying,--

"What shall we do now? How will it be in the world? Dokos Herit, Klak
Loimis, and Wima Loimis have done wrong. They are angry and think bad
things. They will make trouble."

"Come into the sweat-house, you my people," said Olelbis, "and talk.
Say what you think is best to do."

All who were in Olelpanti at that time went into the sweat-house,
where they talked five nights and five days. On the sixth morning
Olelbis called the two Hus brothers and said,--

"I have a great work for you. Go down to Tsarauheril, where the first
tree is. Right there a people will come up out of the earth, and they
will come soon. A little above that place, you two brothers must go
to work and make a stone road from the earth up here to Olelpanti. You
will find stones and pile them firmly. Make the building very strong.
The road itself will be like steps, one higher than another. When you
have built half-way up to Olelpanti, you will make a place in which
people may spend a night. Put good water there. When you have finished
the whole road, people will come up out of the earth, and when they
have come up they will go around on the earth everywhere, and live and
grow old. When they are old, they can go to the beginning of the road
made by you and climb the steps. When they are at the water, which is
half-way, they will drink of it, rest one night, and next day travel
on till they come here to Olelpanti.

"I will put two springs of water at this end,--one for them to bathe
in, the other to drink. If an old man is coming up, he will drink of
the water half-way, he will drink and feel better, and when he reaches
this end and comes to the water here, he will bathe in one spring,
drink from the other, and come out young, fresh, and strong. If an old
woman comes, she will drink and bathe and come out a young girl. Then
they will go down to the earth again young and healthy. When they grow
old a second time, they will come up, drink, and bathe again, and be
young a second time; and it will be this way forever. Nobody will die.
No man will have a wife, no woman a husband; all will be as brothers
and sisters. When the trees grow large which are small now, there will
be no limbs except at the top, and the acorns on those trees will
have no shells. They will be ready to eat without husking or cracking,
and it will be so on all trees,--no husks or shells on the acorns;
nobody will need to climb; the nuts will fall ready to be eaten."

When Olelbis had finished talking, he sent away the two brothers. "Go
now," said he, "and make that great road."

The two brothers started. They came down at Sonomyai, looked around,
and said,--

"This must be the place of which Olelbis told us. This must be the
place where we are to work: we will begin here."

"My brother," said the elder Hus, "I will bring stones to you; plenty
of them; big stones. You will put them together,--lay them in order
and make the walls."

They began to work. On the first day they piled the road up as high as
a big house. Next day they piled all day; made the road as high as a
tall tree. The third day it was very high; the fourth still higher. It
was rising very fast. The brothers worked well, and had great power.
The building was already the largest ever seen on this earth. On the
fifth day the top could hardly be seen. On the sixth day it was
touching the clouds.

A little before noon of the sixth day the two brothers saw something
moving from the southwest. When it came near they saw a man with
mempak around his neck. He wore an otter-skin headband, an otter-skin
quiver, and a Sedit skin, which he wore like a coat. He had on
buckskin leggings ornamented with kobalus, and his shirt was stuck
full of kobalus, the sharp end of the shell out. He was dressed
beautifully. When this man had come near, he watched the two brothers
at work. They did not speak to him.

This was Sedit. At last he said,--

"My grandsons, stop work; rest awhile; come and tell me what you are
doing. Come and sit awhile here with me, and we will talk. When an
uncle or a grandfather comes, people always stop work and talk with
their relative."

The brothers made no answer; kept on at their work; paid no heed to
Sedit.

"Grandsons," said he again, "stop awhile; come and talk with me; tell
me what you are doing. I want to learn, come and tell me what you
know; rest awhile. I might tell you something better than what you
know. Perhaps you think, grandsons, that I don't know anything. Come
and sit down and I will tell you something wise. If you don't come, I
will spoil your work. I will destroy what you are doing."

When the two brothers heard this, they were frightened; they thought
that he might injure their work, and they came. When they reached the
ground and walked up to Sedit, they asked,--

"Which way did you come, grandfather? Where do you live?"

"My grandsons," said Sedit, "I came from a place not very far from
this. I was walking around to see if I could see something. I heard
people talking last night about you. They said that you were making a
road, and I thought that I would come here to look at your work, and
talk to you."

"Very well," said the brothers. "This work which we are doing is not
for us. It is for others. Perhaps you think this work is for us; it is
not, it is done at command of another. This work is for Olelbis.
Olelbis sent us down here to make this great road."

"What!" cried Sedit, "are you working for Olelbis? Did he send you
down here to do this? Did he tell you to make this road, and have you
come here to make it for him, my grandsons? Do you believe what
Olelbis says to you? Do you believe what he says to other people? Do
you mind him and work for him? I don't believe in Olelbis. I don't
believe what he says, I don't care for what he says."

"My grandfather," said the elder Hus, "hold on, stop talking. I don't
like to hear you say such words, I don't like to hear you talk in that
way. I am going to tell you why all this work is done, why this road
is made. I have told you nothing."

Sedit sat down and said: "Well, tell me. I am glad to hear what you
say. I am glad to hear why you are making this road."

The elder brother began: "Olelbis says that a new people will come on
this earth soon, that they will live and go around, and after a while
they will grow old. When very old, they will come to this road to go
to Olelpanti and be young again. When half-way up, it will be evening.
They will drink water from a spring and pass the night there. Next
day they will go on, and be at the end of the road in the
evening,--they will be in Olelpanti, where Olelbis lives. They will
find water there. They will drink from one spring and bathe in the
water of another. When they come out, they will be young. Next day
they will come down half-way, drink of the water, stay one night, then
come to the earth, and be young and fresh as they were at first.

"No man will have a wife, no woman a husband. They will be to one
another as brothers and sisters. That is what Olelbis wishes, and
because he wishes it he has sent us to make this road. When the road
is built to Olelpanti, where Olelbis lives, these trees around here,
which are small now, will be large. They will grow up and be very
tall. They will have no limbs except those near the top, where
branches will run out. On those branches acorns will come, and the
acorns will have no shells on them. They will be all ready and fit to
eat. The people who are to come out of the earth will not be able to
climb these trees, and they will have no need to climb, for the acorns
will fall, and the people will pick them up and have plenty of food
without work, without trouble."

Sedit listened and looked at the elder Hus brother. Then he turned to
the younger Hus and said sneeringly,--

"Hu! Do you believe all that? Do you think that every word is true
which Olelbis says? Do you think it is wise? Do you think it is good?
Now, my grandsons, you wait awhile, and I will tell you something. You
ought to know that an old man like me has words to speak,--that he
knows something wise. I have something to tell you which is better
than all this. I will tell you what it is. I will tell you now.
Suppose an old man goes up this road all alone, drinks from one
spring, bathes in the other, and comes down young. He will be all
alone just as he was when he went up."

"Suppose an old woman and an old man go up, go alone, one after the
other, and come back alone, young. They will be alone as before, and
will grow old a second time, and go up again and come back young, but
they will be alone, just the same as at first. They will have nothing
on earth to be glad about. They will never have any friends, any
children; they will never have any fun in the world; they will never
have anything to do but to go up this road old and come back down
young again.

"Now, my grandsons, I will tell you something better, and you will
like what I tell you. I like it because it is good. I am going to say
something wiser than anything Olelbis has told you yet. It will be
better, very much better if trees have limbs to the ground, and if
acorns have husks and shells on them. When trees have limbs to the
ground, a man can climb them, take a long stick in his hand, and knock
acorns to the ground. Others will come under the tree and gather them.
When the acorns fall, women will jump and say, 'Oh! oh!' and laugh and
talk and be glad and feel well. I think that is better. People can
take the acorns home and put them on the ground. Then they will say,
'Come, let us husk these acorns.' Men and women will go and sit down
and husk the acorns. When they are doing this, they will throw husks
back and forth at each other. They will have fun and laugh and be
pleased and feel well. I think that this is better; I know that you
will like it.

"Besides, what are people to eat if nothing dies? Deer will not die,
fish will not die; the coming people cannot kill them. What are they
to eat? They will have nothing to eat except acorns.

"I think it is better for women and men--young men and young women--to
marry, live day and night with each other. When they get up in the
morning, the man will work for the woman, the woman will work for the
man, and they will help each other. I think that the better way. If a
man has a wife, he will catch fish and kill deer, he will bring them
in, and give them to his wife to cook. She will cook them, and both
will eat. I think that is the right way. If people live in this
manner, and a woman has a child, her neighbors will say, 'There is a
nice baby over there,' and they will go to see it, and will say, 'What
a nice baby that woman has!' I think this is better than anything
Olelbis told you.

"When that baby grows up and another baby grows up, they will be a man
and a woman, and the two will get married and have children
themselves, and in that way there will be plenty of people always; new
people, young people. When a man grows old, he will die; when a woman
grows old, she will die. When they die, others will go around and tell
their neighbors about it, and say, 'A woman died over there,' or 'A
man died over here. They will bury him to-morrow.' Then all the
people will make ready to help the relatives of the dead man; they
will cry, the dead man's relatives will cry and mourn. I think this is
better. When a man dies, his nearest relatives will cut their hair
very close, paint the face black; and when people see one of them
coming or going, they will say, 'His father is dead,' or 'His wife is
dead,' or 'His mother is dead,' and they will talk about that man and
his dead father, or dead mother, or dead wife, and say, 'Poor man, he
has lost his father, or his mother, or his wife.' I think this is
better.

"When an old woman dies, she will leave a daughter, and that daughter
will have a daughter, or an old man dies, he will leave a son, and
that son will have a son. As men and women grow old, they will die,
and their places will be taken by young people. I think this is the
right way. I think this is the best way. All living things should go
this way,--all should grow old and then die. When the new people come
on this earth, they ought to go this way. When those people come and
live all around on this earth, they will die in many ways,--they will
fight with each other and die; when trees grow old, they will die and
fall down; everything will die in like manner.

"When a man dies, his friends will put mempak on him, like this which
I have around my neck, and an otter-skin band around his head, and
give him a quiver, dress him, and then put him in the ground. When a
man goes to some place, a grizzly bear may catch and kill him, or a
rattlesnake will bite and kill him, and when people fight they will
use flint and kill one another. People will get angry and fight. When
there is a gathering, somebody will come running in and say, 'People
over there are fighting.' Those inside will hurry to see, and will
find a man killed, and say, 'A good man is killed;' then they will
punish the others for killing him."

The two brothers sat there, made no answer.

"Well, my grandsons," continued Sedit, "I know that what I tell you is
right. What do you think?"

The brothers said nothing at first. They thought and thought. After a
while the elder looked at Sedit and said,--

"I think what you say is better. I think that it is right. I suppose
it is true. I believe that you are old enough and ought to know. I
think that you are right."

"Grandfather," said the younger brother, "would you like to die, too,
the same as others, and be lying in the ground and not rise any more;
never go around with an otter-skin band on your head, and a beautiful
quiver at your back, and fine things such as you are wearing to-day?
You want others to die; you want death in the world. What would you
say if you had to die yourself? You want all the coming people to die,
and all living things hereafter to die and be gone from here. Olelbis
does not want any one to die, but you want all living things on this
earth to die. You want to spoil all the work which Olelbis sent us
down here to do."

When the younger brother said this, the two stood up and walked off a
little way, and Sedit said,--

"My grandsons, come back, come back. We have not finished talking yet.
We must talk more. We will talk this all over again. Come back, my
grandsons, come back."

But the two brothers did not turn back; they walked on, walked toward
the east always--said nothing. After a time they turned and went to
where their road was. They pulled out some great stones, and the whole
road fell to the ground.

The two brothers flew up then, circling around for a while. They went
higher and higher, till at last they disappeared and went to
Olelpanti.

Sedit saw them fly up, watched them till they disappeared. He stood
looking around for a long time. At last he said,--

"What am I to do now? I wish I had not said all that, I wish I had not
said so much. I wish I had not said anything."

He stood around there and kept repeating: "What am I to do now? I am
sorry. Why did I talk so much? Hus asked me if I wanted to die. He
said that all on earth here will have to die now. That is what Hus
said. I don't know what to do. What can I do?"

He looked around and found a plant with long, broad leaves, the wild
sunflower. He found this plant in great plenty, and took many leaves
from it. He pulled off all his fine clothes, threw them aside, then
stuck the leaves into his body, all the way up and down his legs,
body, and arms, and said,--

"Now I will go up to Olelpanti. I am not going to stay down here
where people die. I am going up to the place where the Hus brothers
went."

He made a tail of leaves; then he rose and flew around and around,
rose pretty high; the leaves began to get dry and break one after
another. After a while Sedit, whirling round and round, came down with
great force, struck the ground, and was crushed to pieces.

The Hus brothers went up to Olelpanti. Olelbis said,--

"There are rocks at the south not far from the sweat-house; go there
and stay."

Olelbis looked down, and saw Sedit trying to fly to Olelpanti; he saw
him fall.

"It is his own fault," said Olelbis. "Sedit is the first to die,
killed by his own words; hereafter all his people will fall around and
die and be found dead at roadsides and places where people pass. The
people to come will see them there."

The name of the place where the ruined road was is Sonomyai.

Our Wintu people say that ever since white men settled in the country
they have been drawing away the stones which the Hus brothers piled
up. They have taken them as far as fifteen miles to build chimneys.




HAWT


PERSONAGES

After each name is given that of the beast, bird, or thing into which
the personage was changed subsequently.

=Chírchihas=, mountain squirrel (red); =Handokmit=, striped snake;
=Hau=, red fox; =Hawt=, eel; =Hus=, turkey buzzard; =Kanhlalas=,
weasel; =Karkit=, raven; =Kinus=, wood dove; =Kiriú=, loon; =Lutchi=,
humming-bird; =Memtulit=, otter; =Múrope=, bull snake; =Nomhawena=,
----; =Nop=, deer; =Patkilis=, jack rabbit; =Patit=, panther; =Sedit=,
coyote; =Tichelis=, ground squirrel; =Tsaik=, bluejay; =Tsárarok=,
kingfisher; =Tsaroki Sakahl=, brown-green snake; =Tsihl=, black bear;
=Tsileu=, yellowhammer; =Tsudi=, mouse; =Tunhlucha=, frog; =Waida
Dikit=, Dolly Varden trout; =Waida Werris=, Polar star; =Wai Hau=,
silver-gray fox; =Waiti=, north side; =Watwut=, mountain bluejay;
=Wima=, grizzly bear; =Yípokos=, black fox.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the south side of Bohem Puyuk is a small mountain called Tede
Puyuk. Near that small mountain lived Waida Dikit Kiemila. He lived
all alone, without neighbors. There was no house near his. He lived
long in that place, thinking what was best for him to do, thinking,
thinking. After a great while he thought: "The best thing to do is to
build a sweat-house."

He built a sweat-house about a mile west of the place where he was
living. When he had finished, he took a kind of red earth and painted
the eastern half of the house red on the outside. The western half he
painted green with paint made from leaves of bushes. After he had
painted the western half, all the different kinds of bushes whose
leaves he had used for paint grew out of that side of the
sweat-house.

The sweat-house was ready for use now, and Waida Dikit went to see a
man, Tsaroki Sakahl, who lived farther south.

"My grandson," said Waida Dikit, "I wish you would come up and stay in
my house. I have no one to keep me company. I wish you would come and
live with me."

"I will go with you," said Tsaroki, and he went to live with the old
man.

Waida Dikit had not told Tsaroki of the sweat-house, he took him to
the old house. After two or three nights Waida Dikit said,--

"My grandson, what shall we do? What would you like to do? What will
be best for us? We must talk about something. There should be
something for us to talk about. We must have something to say."

"Well," said Tsaroki, "I think that you want what is best; you want to
see somebody, to see something. I think that is what you want. I think
I know what you want. The best way to get what you want is to build a
sweat-house."

"That is wise talk, my grandson, I like to hear it. I have a
sweat-house built--all finished."

"Where is it?" asked Tsaroki.

"I will show it to you soon," answered Waida Dikit.

Putting his hand behind him, he picked up a small basket, took out
yellow paint with his thumb and forefinger, and drew a yellow streak
from Tsaroki's head down his back. The young man had been all green;
now there was yellow on his back. Next Waida Dikit took a net woven of
grass fibre, like a woman's hair net, and put it on Tsaroki's head.
"You are ready now," said he. Then he led him out of the house and
said, pointing to the west,--

"Look! There is our sweat-house. Now, my grandson, I am going to take
you to that house. The east side is painted red. When we are there,
don't go near the sweat-house on this eastern side; pass by, but not
too near, a little way off. When we go in I will take the eastern half
and stay in it; you will take the other half and stay on the western
side, where there is green paint. That is where you are to lie, on the
green side."

They started. The old man walked ahead. When they went in, Waida Dikit
took the eastern half of the house and Tsaroki the western. The young
man sat down, and then Waida Dikit took a pipe which was in the
sweat-house.

"My grandson," said he, "you will find a pipe right there on your side
of the house and a sack of tobacco. You may smoke if you wish."

Tsaroki took the pipe, looked at it, liked it well. This pipe was from
Wai Hola Puyuk. When he drew in the smoke and puffed out the first
whiff, the whole house was filled so that nothing was seen in it.
Waida Dikit put his head outside the door. There was smoke outside
everywhere. He could see nothing. Then he turned back and said,--

"My grandson, you are a good man. You are a strong man. You smoke
well. This will do for the first time.--If he does that again,"
thought the old man, "there will be nothing seen in this world; all
will be covered with smoke;" and he said, "You are a strong man; that
is enough for this time."

"I should like to know why he says, 'That is enough.' What does he
want to do with me?" thought Tsaroki. "Maybe he is trying me in some
way."

"My grandson," said the old man, after a while, "I should like to see
somebody; I should like to see something, see people; I should like to
have fun and see games of some sort."

"I should like to see them too," answered Tsaroki; "I should like to
see them, my grandfather. You are older than I; if you tell me what to
do, I will do it."

"My grandson, can you play on anything?"

"I should like to play if you would teach me," said Tsaroki.

The old man put his hand behind him into a basket of things, drew out
a flute and gave it to Tsaroki, who took it quickly, he was so glad.
He sat down, crossed his legs, and before he had blown into the flute,
just as he touched his lips with it, beautiful sounds came out.

The young man was glad, wonderfully glad. The old man, who sat looking
at him, asked,--

"How do you like the flute, my grandson?"

"I like it well," said Tsaroki.

"I am glad to hear you play, my grandson; I am glad when you do
something good. When I was young, I used to say good things, I used
to do good things. Now, my grandson, think what you would like best to
do."

"I should like to hear something nice, to hear music, to hear
beautiful sounds."

After he had taken the flute Tsaroki did not sleep; he played for
three days and three nights without stopping; then he stopped and
asked,--

"What is this flute? What is it made of? It sounds so sweetly."

"My grandson, I will tell you; that flute is of wood,--alder wood.
That is an alder flute, but the wood is people's bones. There were
people long ago, and that alder wood grew out of their bones. My
grandson, would you like to have another young man with you, or do you
wish to be alone? I think it would be better for you to have company."

"My grandfather, I should like to have another man with me; I could
talk with him. I could live then more pleasantly."

"My grandson, to see another young man you must go to the west; you
must go in the middle of the night, when it is very dark, so that no
one may see you. My grandson, it is better for you to go to-night."

"Where? Which way do you want me to go, my grandfather?"

"Go west from here, far away; you will start when it is dark; you will
get there in the dark. You will go to where the old woman Nomhawena
Pokaila lives: she is your grandmother. When you go to her house, ask
her about your brother; she will tell you where he is."

"My grandfather, I don't believe that I can find her house. I don't
know what kind of house it is."

"You cannot miss it, my grandson. The night will be very dark; no one
will be able to see anything, but you cannot miss the house. It is a
little house; no one can see it, but you cannot miss it. You will go
there very quickly, though 'tis far from here and the night is dark."

Then the old man showed him a small sand trail; it was bright, just
like a ray of light in the darkness, though it was very narrow, as
narrow as a hair, and all around it was dark night. The old man had
made this trail purposely.

Tsaroki started, and could see the trail straight ahead of him; he
went over it as swiftly as an arrow goes from a bow. He travelled
right on, and at the end of the trail, just on the trail itself, was a
little bark house. He went into this house, and saw an old woman lying
there with her back to the fire; she was sleeping on the south side of
it. He walked in and stood at the north side. He sat down then, and
was sitting a while when the old woman woke, turned her face to the
fire, and saw some one opposite. She rose, stirred the fire to make
light, looked at the young man, and said,--

"I see some person over there; who is it?"

"My grandmother, I am Tsaroki Sakahl. I have come because my
grandfather, Waida Dikit, sent me to see you, so that you might tell
me about my brother. I should like to know where my brother lives. I
have come to see my brother and speak to him."

"Very well, my grandson, I will tell you. He lives right over here on
the west."

As soon as she had finished speaking, Tsaroki stood up and went toward
the west. He had not made many steps when he saw a large space, a
broad space on which a great many people were sitting. The place was
dark, but the people could see one another. Tsaroki saw all, and
looked around carefully. He saw that all were at work except one man,
who was sitting in the middle in a good place. He looked a long time,
not knowing what to do, for Waida Dikit had said to him,--

"You must not let any one know but your brother why I sent you, and
tell him not to tell others."

No one present saw Tsaroki, and he thought: "I don't know how I shall
go to my brother without letting any one know." At last he made up his
mind what to do. He went down under the ground where he had been
sitting, and came up just in front of the great man, his brother.

The people were dressing skins, making arrow-points, and finishing
arrows. All were at work but the man in the middle. Tsaroki came up in
front of him and whispered,--

"My brother, I have come for you. My grandfather sent me to ask you to
go to him and not to tell any one."

"That is well. I will go. Let us start."

That was all he said. This big man was Hawt. Tsaroki had brought his
flute, but he could not use it, for he had to keep his journey secret
and not let himself be seen; he held the flute hidden under his arm.

"Let us go," said Hawt; "you go ahead."

Tsaroki went into the ground, came out where he had been sitting at
first, and then went to the house of the old woman, his grandmother.
Hawt stood up to make ready for the journey. The people kept on
working. They were all of the Hawt people, and the big man was their
chief.

Hawt dressed, and took his bow and arrows. When ready, he turned and
said,--

"My people, I am going to leave you, to be gone two or three days,
perhaps longer."

That was all he said; he did not say where he was going, nor why. He
walked away and went to Nomhawena's house, where Tsaroki was waiting.
The two brothers had been sitting just a little while when the old
woman said to them,--

"Now, my grandsons, you must go; you must be at Waida Dikit's before
daylight; you must travel while it is dark, we do not wish to let
other people know of your journey. Go. I shall be in this house, but
shall hear all that is happening at your place."

They left the old woman, and reached Waida Dikit's before daylight.
The old man was up already, and standing by the fire in the middle of
the sweat-house combing his red hair, which touched his feet. The
moment he went into the house Tsaroki took his flute, lay on his back,
and began to play. Hawt stood a while; didn't know where to sit. At
last Waida Dikit said to him,--

"My grandson, I am living here in a small house. There isn't much room
in it, but go north of the fire and sit there."

Just as Hawt was sitting down at the appointed side, daylight came.
Tsaroki played two nights and two days. Hawt lay in his place and
listened.

"My grandson," said Waida Dikit to Tsaroki, "I should like to hear you
both play. You must give that flute to Hawt some of the time."

Tsaroki gave the flute to his brother, and from time to time they
passed it from one to the other. Both played; both made beautiful
music. They played day after day, night after night, ten days and ten
nights.

"You play well now, both of you, my grandsons. Would you not like to
hear other persons play?"

"Oh, we should like that very much; we should like to hear other
persons play," said Tsaroki and Hawt.

"I used to hear a friend of mine long ago," said Waida Dikit, "and he
played very well. Would you like to have him play with you?"

"Yes, yes; maybe he would teach us to play better."

"My friend is very old now," said Waida Dikit: "he is Kanhlalas
Kiemila."

"I will go and bring him," said Tsaroki.

"Go, my grandson. I will show you a trail, but do not go near the east
side of my sweat-house. It is not far. Kanhlalas lives northeast from
here."

Tsaroki found Kanhlalas's sweat-house on the trail. He heard music
inside, beautiful music. He stood awhile listening, then went in and
saw an old man lying on his back playing. The old man stopped playing,
but did not speak. Tsaroki touched him on the shoulder and said,--

"My grandfather, I have come for you. Waida Dikit, my grandfather,
sent me to ask you to visit him."

"I will go," was all that the old man said. No questions were asked or
answered. "I have come for you," "I will go;" no more. Those people of
long ago talked in that way; they didn't talk much.

Tsaroki went home. Kanhlalas made ready to go, and went under the
ground. Waida Dikit was lying in his house when on a sudden Kanhlalas
rose at his feet. Waida Dikit sat up when he saw him, took a pipe, and
told him to smoke. Kanhlalas smoked, and the two old men talked a good
while. The young men played, first one, then the other. It was dark in
the sweat-house, but after Kanhlalas came he shone and gave light like
a torch in a dark house. You could see some, but not very much.
Kanhlalas was a grandfather of Waida Werris.

"I sent for you," said Waida Dikit, "for I thought you might teach my
grandsons to play better. They like to make music. They think of
nothing else."

"I am old," said Kanhlalas. "I am not as I used to be. I cannot play
much now. When I was a boy, when I was young, I could play. But I will
play a little."

About dark he said a second time, "I will play a little." So he lay
on his back, took his own flute, which he had brought with him, and
began. The two brothers lay and listened. Kanhlalas never took the
flute out of his mouth from the dark of evening until daylight. Next
day he played, and all night again. When morning came there was a
light stripe down his breast, and when the sun rose his breast was
white, for the breath was nearly out of his body. That morning old
Waida Dikit said,--

"Now we will invite all people in the world who can play, to come
here."

"If you invite all people in the world who can play," said Tsaroki,
"this house will be too small for them."

"No," said the old man, "it will not be too small. You will find it
large enough when they come."

Tsaroki was sent to the northwest to invite people. He went very fast.
In a little while he was at a place just this side of where the sky
touches the earth. He went to Nop Hlut. When near the sweat-house he
heard stamping in a dance. He went in and saw a very big house full of
people sitting around at the wall. Only one woman and a young girl
were dancing in the middle of the house, Nop Pokte and Nop Loimis. The
girl was very small, and had fawn's feet tied behind her head. These
rattled so sharply that you could hear them when far away. As Tsaroki
was coming in through the door on the south, he saw an old man lying
on the north side. This was Nop Kiemila, the master of the house.
Tsaroki went straight to him, put his hand on his shoulder, and
said,--

"I have come for you."

"What kind of call do you make?" asked Nop.

"My grandfather is going to have a playing on flutes."

"I will go," said Nop.

"My grandfather is inviting people from all parts of the world. All
will be invited who can play on the flute."

Waida Dikit himself went south to invite people living in the water,
and sent Tsaroki to invite all the land people. They went far and near
to invite all. After a time both grew wearied, and wanted to get some
one to take invitations. They thought who would be best in heat and
cold, light and darkness, and thought that Kinus would be; so they
called him, and hired him to go.

Kinus went as far as he could go, went around the whole world to a
distance a little this side of where the sky comes down. After a time
he returned and said,--

"This world is wide and big. I called all the people as far as I went,
but I was not able to go everywhere,--this world goes farther than I
went. Whole days I could get no water, no food; but I invited all the
people that I saw."

Now, while Kinus was speaking the invited people were listening; and
there were many of them then at Waida Dikit's. Lutchi sat at one side
and listened.

"There is," said Waida Dikit, "a man that we should like to see here.
Waida Werris and also a man who lives far in the East, Patkilis; he
lives behind the sky, beyond the place where the sky touches the
earth, and Sedit lives with him. We want these three. Now Kinus cannot
go to them,--nobody that we know is able to go to them. What shall we
do?"

All talked about this. Lutchi sat back in silence, and listened to
what they were saying.

"This sweat-house is too small," said Kanhlalas.

"You will see," answered Waida Dikit.

The sweat-house was spreading out, growing gradually, growing all the
time as the people came. A great many came that afternoon. The house
extended now as far as the eye could see. Whenever new people came,
Waida Dikit would blow and say, "I wish this house to be larger!" And
the house stretched, became wider and longer and higher. In the
evening great crowds were there already.

Kinus and the rest talked all night and the next day. "Nobody can go
to Waida Werris, Patkilis, and Sedit. That was what they said."

They asked all present, and each answered, "I cannot go to them." They
talked and talked. At last one man said to another, "Let's ask that
Lutchi Herit over there; maybe he can go." A third said, "Yes, let's
ask him." And the three said to Waida Dikit, "Ask that little man;
perhaps he can go." "He is small," said Waida Dikit, "but I will ask
him." He went up to Lutchi, touched him on the shoulder, and asked,--

"My grandson, can you do something for me? You are small, but I am
asking you."

Lutchi said nothing; just raised his brows, which meant "Yes." As soon
as he did this, Waida Dikit put his hand under his arm and took out a
kunluli (a delicate blue flower that grows near the water), and gave
it to Lutchi. Lutchi took it in his open palm, looked at it, rubbed it
between his two hands, spat on it, and made a paste which was a
beautiful blue paint. Then he rubbed his face, arms, breast--he became
blue all over (to this day Lutchi is blue, he was white before). He
went out among the people then, and said,--

"People, look at me! What do I look like? Haven't I a nice color now?"

"You are beautiful," said the people. "You look well."

It was at the point of daybreak. They could see just a bit of light.
When he was ready to start, Lutchi said,--

"I don't know how far it is, but if I go to those places I shall be
back here at sunrise. If they are very far away, I shall be here when
the sun is as high as the tree-tops."

"Do you think you will be back by sunrise?" asked Kinus. "Those places
are very far away."

"I know they are far away," said Lutchi.

"I have been all over the world," added Kinus. "I was gone a long
time, but those places are farther away than any spot where I have
been."

"Ho! Now I am going!" said Lutchi; and he darted straight up into the
sky, next down, and up and down again. Then he called out,--

"How do you like that? Do you think I can go to those people? This is
the way I travel."

He shot away east and returned. Then he went west and came back in a
twinkle. Next he turned north and was gone. He had never travelled
through the air before. Till that morning he had always walked on the
ground, just as we do now. He went straight to Waida Werris's house
and went in. It was dazzling there, and seemed to him just as bright
as daylight seems to a man coming out of a dark place.

Lutchi saw some one inside, who was young and beautiful. He could not
look at his face, it was so bright. There were two brothers in the
house. The younger was Waiti, the elder Waida Werris. Waiti never left
the house; never went abroad or wandered, stayed at home all the time.

"I have come," said Lutchi, "to invite you to meet people from all the
world at a flute-playing in Waida Dikit's sweat-house."

"I will go," said Waida Werris. He knew all that was going on. He had
seen it while travelling early, before daylight.

"I am going now," said Lutchi to Waida Werris. And as soon as he was
outside he rushed off toward the west, came back, rose in the air,
came down, and then shot away, like a lightning flash, eastward to
find Patkilis and Sedit. Soon he was in the east, where the sky comes
to the earth. He took a sky stick, which he had brought with him,
pried up the sky, raised it a little, and then he went under to the
other side. When the sky came down again behind him and struck the
earth, it made an awful noise which was heard over the world. The
whole world shook. All the people at Waida Dikit's heard the noise and
wondered.

"What can that be?" asked they. "What awful noise is that?" Waida
Dikit knew what the noise was, but he never told any one.

Lutchi went straight east from the other side of the sky, and never
stopped till he found Patkilis and Sedit. They were in another world,
another sky came down to their world, and they lived almost at the
edge of that second sky. Lutchi went into their sweat-house. They were
sitting just inside the door, one at one side, the other at the other;
the door was on the east side. When Lutchi had sat a little while,
Sedit rose and said,--

"My grandson, which way have you come?"

"I come here for you and Patkilis," answered Lutchi. "Waida Dikit sent
me to invite you to a flute-playing at his sweat-house. Nobody else
could come to you, so he asked me to come."

"We are glad," answered they. "We will go. You go ahead. But how shall
we pass the sky?"

"I will wait at the edge for you," said Lutchi; and he went on.

When Sedit and Patkilis were ready, Sedit said, "I wish this road on
which I must travel to be short, very short."

They started, and found the road so short that Lutchi was waiting at
the edge of the sky only a little while when they were with him.
Lutchi pried up the sky a second time, and the three passed under to
the western side. Again there was an awful noise, and the whole world
trembled.

"Now I am going quickly; you can move as you like," said Lutchi. He
went west like a flash, and just as the sun was peeping over the
mountains he was back at Waida Dikit's.

"Have you heard what is going on in this world that makes such a
noise?" asked Waida Dikit. "These people heard an awfully big noise."

"That was my travelling," said Lutchi. "Kinus, whom you sent first,
could not go to those three people. I went. They are on the road, and
will be here in a few days."

All the people heard this and were glad.

"Now we shall hear great music," said they.

While travelling along together, Patkilis spoke to Sedit and advised
him. "When we are in Waida Dikit's house," said he, "don't talk much.
Sit down like a wise man and look on; be silent; don't act like a
little boy."

Sedit was talking all the time. He told Patkilis what he was going to
do. He would do this and do that, he said.

Two days passed, and the two men had not come. On the third day, near
the middle of the forenoon, people saw a beautiful little arrow come
down just by the door of the sweat-house,--a bright arrow. When it
struck the ground, it made a grating noise, and they said,--

"That is a nice arrow. Who sent such an arrow?" And all liked it.

There were crowds of people in the sweat-house. Some of them wanted
the arrow. "Let's pull it up!" said they, "and see who made it;" but
Waida Dikit would not let them touch it. "Let it stay where it is. Do
not touch it," said he, for he knew that it was Patkilis's arrow, and
that it meant: "I am coming. I shall be there soon."

While the people were talking about the arrow, two men swept in
through the door. No one saw their faces or their heads, just their
legs and shadows.

"Give them room, let them in," said Waida Dikit.

"Where can they sit?" asked Tsaroki.

"Give each a place on the east side," said Waida Dikit.

The two, Patkilis and Sedit, went to the east side and sat down.
Nobody had seen Waida Werris come, but he was in the house.

When leaving home that morning, Waida Werris said to Waiti, his
brother,--

"You will stay and keep house, as you do always. You will be here, but
you will see me all the time, you will see me night and day. Watch me;
they will do other things there besides playing on flutes."

Patkilis and Sedit asked Waida Dikit if Waida Werris had come.

"I do not know where he is," replied the old man. "No one has seen
him."

"Oh, he will not come," said many people. "What kind of a person is
Waida Werris? He is nobody. What do we want of him?"

Waida Werris was sitting there all the time listening. Waida Dikit
knew well what kind of person he was, but said nothing. That night
after all invited people had come, Waida Dikit said:

"Listen, all you people here present. I have called this gathering to
find who is the best flute-player, who can make the best music in this
world. Let us begin. Let each play alone."

Tsaroki began the trial. "I will begin," said he to his brother Hawt,
"then let the others play. You can play when you like."

"I am satisfied," said Hawt. "I will play last."

"That is well," answered Tsaroki. "I will play first, all will follow,
and you may play last."

Tsaroki began. He played a little while, not long; played well.
Kanhlalas played next. All liked his music. Watwut Kiemila played
third; played splendidly.

"Go ahead and play, all you people," said Waida Dikit.

Tsileu Herit played best up to his time, played till almost morning,
till just before daylight. The inside of the sweat-house had become
red, and some asked,--

"Why is it red everywhere inside the sweat-house?"

"We do not know," answered others; "something makes it red."

One man went up to Waida Dikit and asked, "Why is it red inside the
sweat-house?"

"I will tell you. Do you see Tsileu Herit there? Well, he has been
playing all night, the breath is gone out of him, he is all red, and
the whole sweat-house is red from him."

About daylight Tsileu stopped, and then it grew as dark as in a house
when a fire is put out in the night. Now Tsaik played all day, and at
sundown the sweat-house was blue, for Tsaik had grown blue.

All played to see who could play best. Every kind of people played.
When any one was out of breath, he stopped playing, and received a new
color. When Murope lost breath, he was spotted. When Handokmit lost
breath, he became striped. Patkilis played three nights and two days,
and when he gave out after sundown, he was roan. Wai Hau played five
nights, and at sunrise the fifth morning he was red. Kiriu Herit
played five nights, and at the middle of the sixth night he was black,
and his breath gone.

And so for many days and nights they played, one person after another,
till one night all had finished except Hawt. Hawt was the last to
play. All were asleep now. All had lost breath, and received new
colors. Tsaroki went to his brother on the north side of the house,
and said,--

"Begin, my brother; over near the fire there is a place for you; go
under the ground, and when you come out, you will play."

Hawt went under the ground, and came out near the fireplace. He lay on
his back and began to play. He had two rows of holes in his body, one
on each side; he fingered these holes, drew in air through his
nostrils, and sent it out through the holes in both sides. Hawt was
playing on his own body. At first, all the people were asleep, except
one person, Tsudi Herit. Tsudi heard Hawt, and he heard, as in a doze,
wonderful sounds. He listened a long time, thinking it a dream. When
Tsudi found that he was not sleeping, he shook the man next him, and
said,--

"Wake up, wake up! Who is playing? All have played, but I have never
heard music like this. Many have played here, but no one played in
this way."

The person he roused was Hus. Hus said nothing, he was old and nearly
bald, he took a pipe and began to smoke. Tsudi roused other people,
one after another.

"Wake up, rise, sit up; listen to the music somebody is playing."

They woke, one after another. "Who is playing?" asked one. "Who is
it?" asked another. "We have played many days and nights, but no one
played like that. All have their own flutes. Who can this be?"

At last some one said: "I know who is playing. It is Hawt."

"How could Hawt play?" asked others. "Whose flute has Hawt? He has
none of his own. Each of us brought a flute, but Hawt brought none.
Whose flute has he now?"

Every one heard the wonderful music, and every one said, "We should
like to see the man who plays in this way."

It was night, and dark in the sweat-house. All began to say how much
they wanted light to see who was playing. Waida Werris was lying back
in the east half of the sweat-house, and heard every word. He, too,
wanted to look at the player. He sat up, pulled one hair out of his
beard, gave it to Tsudi, and said,--

"Go down near that man who is playing, and hold up this hair so that
people may see him."

Tsudi took the hair and went along quietly. No one heard him. He held
the hair over Hawt's head, and there was a light from it that filled
the whole house. It was as bright as day there. All the people were
seen sitting up, each hugging his flute. No man would lend his flute
to any one else in the world for any price. All were looking toward
the spot whence the music came. In the light they saw a man lying on
his back with his arms across his breast, but they could not see that
he was doing anything. He had no flute, he made no motion with his
mouth, for he fingered his sides as he would a flute, and made the
music by drawing in air through his nostrils, and sending it out
through the holes in his sides.

Tsudi held up Waida Werris's single hair, and people watched Hawt to
see how he made the beautiful music. He was lying on his back making
wonderful sounds. He played the music of Tsaik's song, of Waida
Werris's song, of Tsaroki's song. They could hear the music, but there
was no motion of Hawt's mouth and they could not see his fingers play.
He gave the music of Patkilis's song and of Sedit's. He gave the music
of the songs of all people in the sweat-house.

"Hawt has beaten the world!" cried the assembly. "He can do more than
we can; we yield, we are silent. Hawt is the best player in the world!
No one can play as he plays!"

Hawt gave his own music next. No one knew that music but him, no one
could play it but him. There was no other music so loud and strong, no
other music so soft and low.

When the people had watched Hawt a long time and listened a long time,
he stopped. All cried out then,--

"Hawt is the one great musician, the only great player on earth!"

Tsudi put down the hair and all were in the dark. He carried the hair
back and gave it to Waida Werris.

People began to talk and ask one another: "Where did that light come
from; whose is it?" One said Tsudi had it; another said, "No, he never
had a light like that." "Who gave it to him?" asked a third. "Some one
must have given it to Tsudi. Let us ask him about this."

Here and there people said: "Only Waida Werris could make such a
light. What kind of person is Waida Werris? We should like to see
Waida Werris."

"I have never seen Waida Werris, but I have heard people tell how nice
looking he is, and that he can be seen from afar," said Patkilis. "If
he were here he might make such a light, but he is not here, or we
should all see him right away."

Waida Werris was lying near them, and heard all they said.

"Let us ask Waida Dikit," said Karkit Kiemila, a big man, lying on the
west side, facing Waida Werris; and he began to talk to Waida Dikit.

"The people wish to see Waida Werris," said he. "You have invited all
people in the world, and you have invited him. What will you do? Is he
here? Will you let every one see him?"

"Oh, no," said one old man. "Waida Werris is bad. I don't want to see
him." "We have heard that he is good," said others. "We want to see
him." So they were divided.

Waida Werris smoked a while in silence. At last Waida Dikit bent
toward Patkilis and Sedit and asked,--

"What do you think, shall I let people see Waida Werris or not?"

"They want to see him," answered the two. "You have invited them and
invited him. If people wish to see Waida Werris, let them see him."

"Where shall I let them see him?"

"Let all the people go outside the sweat-house," said Patkilis, "and
stand in two long rows, one on each side of the door, and let Waida
Werris go out between them. If he goes out, every one can look at him;
only a few would see him inside the house."

"Very well," answered Waida Dikit. "Now all you people go outside the
house."

Tsaroki opened the door, and went out first. All followed, each
saying as he went, "It is dark: we shall not see Waida Werris."

"You can see him in the dark," said Waida Dikit. "Join hands, all of
you, and go around to the north side of the sweat-house."

"Go you," said Waida Dikit to Tsudi, "and search inside. Tell me when
all the people are out."

Tsudi searched everywhere. "All have gone out," said he.

Waida Dikit closed the door and said: "Some of you people are sleepy,
but wake up, open your eyes, be ready to see--look north."

"What can we do here? Why did we come out in the dark?" asked a
certain Chirchihas. "We can see nothing at this time of night;" and,
turning to Lutchi, he asked: "Have you seen him, or his brother? What
sort of a place do they live in?"

"I cannot tell you now; you will see him soon."

"Be ready, all of you," said Waida Dikit. "Look north."

All looked. There was a pointed mountain not far away, and straight
out before them. They saw a small light rising till it reached the top
of that mountain; there it settled, and soon it seemed near them, just
a few steps from the faces of the people. That was Waida Werris. The
place around was as if in daylight. All could see him; all looked at
him.

"Now, you people, there is Waida Werris before you; do you see him?"

"We see him."

"Hereafter all people will see him there in the north, as you see him
now," said Waida Dikit. "Come back to the sweat-house, all of you."

Tsaroki opened the door, and all went in. "We will talk," said the old
man, "then eat, and after that separate."

Day had come--there was light in the sweat-house. They heard some one
coming, and soon they saw an old woman in the door. This was Tunhlucha
Pokaila. She would not go in, but stood a while holding in both hands
two beautiful baskets of water. These she put down at the door, looked
in, and went away. Waida Dikit took the baskets, put them on the
ground north of the fire, and said,--

"Here is a little water, but come all and use it,--wash."

The old woman was Waida Dikit's sister; she lived north of her
brother's, not far away. There was a rock at that place, with a spring
in it. The rock was her house. Water rose in that rock to the surface
and went into the earth again in another part of the same house. The
old woman had two baskets; the smaller one held water for drinking,
the larger one water for washing. Great crowds of people drank from
the smaller basket and washed from the other; each used what he
needed, the water never grew less; it remained the same always in
quantity.

"Have all washed and drunk?" asked Waida Dikit.

"We have all washed and drunk."

The old man removed the baskets, and set out two others which the old
woman had just brought,--one of cooked venison, and another a very
small basket of acorn porridge. He put the baskets in the middle of
the sweat-house and said,--

"Now, all people, I ask you to eat."

"I will try that food," said Karkit. He went and ate. Next Hus ate,
then Yipokos. Now these three men ate deer meat since that time, and
will always find meat by the smell,--this was the first time they ate
venison. Tsihl and Wima, called also Bohemba, ate all they could from
the little basket, yet the food was not less by one bit. Patit ate
plenty. Hus ate, and so did Sedit. All ate as much as they could;
still each basket was full. The food grew no less. Waida Dikit kept
saying,--

"You people, here is food. I do not need it. Come and eat what there
is."

He sent Tsudi around to ask each man if he had eaten. All said they
had eaten till Tsudi went half around, when he found one man,
Memtulit, who said that he had not eaten, but was willing to eat.

"I will eat if I see anything good," said he.

"Well, go and eat," said Tsudi.

"What kind of food have you?"

"Venison and acorn porridge."

"I do not eat that kind of food."

"Here is a man who has not eaten," said Tsudi; "he cannot eat that
food."

Farther on was found Kiriu, who had not eaten, and a third, a very
young man, Tsararok. "I should like to eat," said he, "but I am timid.
There are so many people here eating."

"What kind of food do you eat, Kiriu?" asked Tsudi.

"I cannot eat venison. I eat what lives in the water." The other two
men said the same.

Waida Dikit went to his old house, where he had dried fish. He caught
besides a net full of little fish. He cooked both kinds and carried
them to the sweat-house, set them down in the middle, and said, "Now
come and eat."

Memtulit ate, so did Kiriu. Tsararok came after a while. He began to
eat the little fish, didn't see the other kind; this is why Tsararok
likes small fish to this day.

The old man asked again, "Have all eaten?"

"We have," answered all.

There was as much food in the two baskets as at first, and the old man
put them outside the house. Sedit saw this, and was angry. He said
that people should leave nothing.

"Don't talk so," said Patkilis. "What is done is right."

"You are all free to stay longer," said Waida Dikit, "but I suppose
that you wish to go home, I suppose you are in a hurry."

"Why should we go so soon?" asked Sedit. "The people from the west
might tell us what they know; we ought to tell them something."

"Keep quiet, Sedit," said Patkilis. "I told you not to talk. There are
many big men here, better men than you, but they don't talk. Waida
Dikit says that we have stayed long enough; that is what he means; you
ought to know it. He spoke as he did because he wished to say
something nice to us and be friends; but you must keep still."

A man on the west side rose now and came toward the middle of the
house, near the fire, stood there, looked about, and spat on the
ground. All the people saw him spit, and in an instant they saw a
small basket rise out of the spittle. Inside the basket were acorns of
mountain live oak. This man was Patit. He went back to his place and
lay down. Waida Dikit set the basket in the middle of the sweat-house,
picked out an acorn, ate it, and said,--

"People, come and eat. My friend Patit has made this for you,--this is
his food."

They never had acorns of that kind till then. Nop came first to the
basket to eat, and to this day he is fond of acorns. Then Tsihl and
Wima and Tichelis and Tsudi and Tsaik went to the basket and ate, and
all are fond of acorns now. No matter how many they took from the
basket, the acorns were none the less.

Sedit sat back ill-natured; he wanted them to eat all the acorns.
Waida Dikit put the basket outside.

Tsihl rose now, went to the place where Patit had spat, and put an
empty basket on the ground. He untied a wide strap, or braid of grass,
which he wore around his wrist, and held down his hand. Something
flowed out of it, like water, till the basket was filled. Then he tied
up his wrist again. The basket was full of seeds of sugar pine. Waida
Dikit ate of them; then called all to eat. People came and ate all
they wanted. The basket was as full as before. Sedit was very angry.

Hau came forward and put down a stone cup. He held his ear over it,
scratched the ear, and out came a stream of manzanita berries. These
were the first manzanita. No one had ever seen those berries in the
world before. Waida Dikit ate a handful of the berries and sat
down--said nothing. All the people hurried to eat, crowded around the
cup, ate as long as they were able, but could not decrease the
berries. Presently Waida Dikit began to itch. He did not know what
troubled him. Soon spots came out all over his body--red, yellow, and
black. This was because he had eaten the berries. His spirit was
afraid of what he had eaten. His spirit did not wish that he should
eat berries, they were not his kind of food; and that was why the
spots came out on him. It was his spirit's fear that brought out the
spots, and he has been spotted ever since. He ate not because he
wished, but because he was master of the house. It was for him to
taste everything, or people would think it bad food.

Now Wima came, put down a basket, and untied a white wristband which
he wore, held his hand down, and wild plums dropped into the basket
and filled it.

This time Waida Dikit sent Tichelis to taste the plums and set out the
basket. People ate, but there were as many plums as before.

These different kinds of food were given to the world for the first
time then, and this is why we have them now.

Tsaik came to the middle of the sweat-house. He tapped the ground with
his nose, and out came a great pile of acorns.

Sedit had eaten as much as he could, and was angry because any was put
away. He kept saying to Patkilis, "I don't like that."

"Sedit," answered Patkilis, "I have warned you against talking so
much. Don't you know that after a while all the new kind of people,
the people to come, will use food in this way, eat what they want, and
put the rest away?"

"You people have talked and been friendly," said Waida Dikit. "This is
the food we need; this will be our only food hereafter."

"Well," said Kanhlalas, standing up, "I think we have almost finished.
If we stay here too long, some bad people may see us and talk about
what we are doing."

Others said: "Yes, we have given all the food we have. If this
gathering lasts longer, bad people may find us and make trouble."

"That is true," said the assembly; "let us part."

"We will part," said Waida Dikit. "I am going to my old house and will
stay there forever. If salmon come up the Wini Mem, they will come as
far as my house and go back."

Next morning all set out for their homes. Tsihl changed his mind on
the road, and went back to Tede Puyuk, where he found that all had
gone except Sedit, Patkilis, Nop, and Hau. These four were outside
the sweat-house, and Tsihl said,--

"We have come back to look at this place again; it pleases us."

They stayed awhile, travelled through the country, and when Olelbis
sent people down here, coyotes, jack rabbits, deer, red-foxes, and
black bear came to Tede Puyuk, and there were many of them ever after
around that whole country.




NORWANCHAKUS AND KERIHA


PERSONAGES

After each name is given that of the creature or thing unto which the
personage was changed subsequently.

=Eltuluma=, ----; =Hubit=, wasp; =Kériha=, ----; =Kuntihlé=, a small
bird unknown; =Lasaswa=, large spider; =Nodal Mónoko=, ----;
=Norwanchakus=, ----; =Norwinte=, ----; =Patkilis=, jack rabbit;
=Pawnit=, kangaroo rat; =Pom Norwanen Pitchen=, daughter of the
Southern Border, the same as =Norwan=; =Puriwa=, dark; =Supchit=,
----; =Sanihas=, daylight; =Tsaik=, blue jay; =Tsiwihl=, blue-breasted
lizard; =Waida Werris=, polar star.

       *       *       *       *       *

The two brothers Norwanchakus and Keriha were on this earth before any
place or thing had a name. When Olelbis took the sky pole and made a
deep furrow from the foot of Bohem Puyuk to the lower valley, and a
river came, the two brothers were at the end of the furrow and started
toward the north. Norwanchakus was the elder; Keriha was very small.

When the brothers started, they could not see well. There was no sun
then; there was only a kind of dim twilight. Waida Werris was in the
sky, and saw the brothers. Fish had got into all rivers now from the
southern pond, where Kuntihle Herit had caught the first fish.

"There are fish in the river," said Keriha; "let us catch some. Let us
take a net up the river and come down with it."

"We have no net, and there is no light; we cannot see anything," said
the elder brother.

"Go, my brother," said Keriha, "to where the sky comes down on the
northwest; go out under it. You will find there the plant kúruti;
bring it."

"I cannot go there," said Norwanchakus; "you go, my brother."

Keriha went through the air quickly; brought the plant--brought all
there was.

"We must have more," said Norwanchakus.

"Well, go and get it," answered Keriha. "It grows beyond the sky in
the southwest."

"I cannot go there; go you," said the elder brother.

Keriha went beyond the sky on the southeast; found plenty of kúruti.
The elder brother made strings of the fibre.

"I am in a hurry to fish," said Keriha. "You are slow, my brother."

"Go straight east beyond the sky," said the other, "and get ash wood
while I am making a net."

Keriha brought the ash. Norwanchakus had the net made, and now he
fixed the ash stick.

"My brother," said Keriha, "we cannot see anything. How can we fish?
There are people around us in the world, perhaps, but we have no good
light to find them."

There was a kind of dim light all the time. The two brothers started,
came north as far as Nomlopi, opposite Pas Puisono, and sat down.

Keriha heard voices in the north and asked, "Do you hear shouting?"

"No; I hear nothing," answered Norwanchakus.

"Let us go toward the shouting," said Keriha.

They went to a place about six miles beyond the river, where they
found a sweat-house.

"These are the first people we have seen," said Keriha. "We shall call
this place Tsarau Heril." They stood near the door of the sweat-house.

"Oh, my brother," said a big man who saw them and came to the door.

"Yes," said Keriha, "you are our brother, you are Norwinte."

Another came and said, "Oh, my brother!"

"You are our brother, too," said Keriha; "you are Eltuluma."

"It is dark. We do not know what to do," said Norwinte.

"And we do not know," answered Keriha.

"Not far from here are more people," said Norwinte. "Let us send to
them to come here. Perhaps we may learn what to do."

Norwinte sent a messenger to the north. He brought a new person soon,
a good-looking man; and when this stranger had talked a while he said,
"There is a person in the southeast who can help us."

"Will you bring him here?" asked Norwinte.

"I cannot go there," said the stranger.

"You go, Keriha," said Norwanchakus. "No one can go there but you."

Keriha went, and was not long gone. He brought back Patkilis.

"My brother Patkilis, do you know of any more people anywhere?"

"I know of no more people. I have seen none; but in the far east I
hear shouting, with dancing and singing."

"Well, my brother, I wish you would go and see what kind of people are
making that noise there."

"I will go," said Patkilis. "I don't think it is very far from here to
where they are."

Patkilis was gone a long time. When he came back, he said: "I saw many
people, but they did not see me. There is a hill beyond the sky in the
east. On the northern slope of it are houses. On the southern slope
there are houses, also. A river flows from this hill westward. South
of the hill every one is dancing. I went into the houses on the north
side. All were empty except one. In the middle house of the village I
found a blind boy. I looked around and saw much in the house. 'Why
have you so many things here?' asked I of the boy. 'What are they good
for? I live on the other side. We haven't such things in our houses.'
He said nothing. I talked a long time to him, asked many questions,
but got no answer. All he said was, 'My people have gone to dance.'
There were piles of acorns inside and outside, great baskets of them
put around everywhere. I sat down. 'What is this?' asked I. 'What is
that? What is in those baskets there?' 'Oh, something,' said the blind
boy; and that was all the answer he made. There were many bags, all
full of something. I saw two small bags hanging in the house, and they
were very full. 'What is in those small bags that are so full?' asked
I. 'Can you tell me, little boy?' 'Why do you want to know
everything?' asked the blind boy. I asked about those two bags in
different ways, but he wouldn't tell me for a long time. I teased him
and teased him to tell. 'You want to know everything,' said he, at
last; 'I will tell you. In one is Puriwa.' 'Well, what is in the other
bag? Tell me. You have told about one, now tell about the other.' He
thought a while and asked, 'Why do you want to know so much? Sanihas
is in the other bag.' He would tell no more, and I came away."

When Patkilis had told all this, Keriha said, after thinking a while:
"This is the best news that we have heard in this world yet; some one
of us ought to go there. We must bring those two bags here. If we open
one, the world will be dark; if we open the other, there will be
daylight. Those acorns, too, are good. You must send some one for
those two bags."

"There is a man up north here, Pawnit. He could go; send for him,"
said Patkilis.

They sent for him, and he came. They told him what they wanted.

"I can go for those things," said he, "but I don't like to go alone.
My brothers, you bring a man here who lives up north, Tsaik. He is
blind of one eye."

When Tsaik came and heard about the acorns, he said: "I should like to
have them; they are good. If I go, I will take the acorns, and you can
bring the two bags," said he to Pawnit. "When you come to that hill in
the east," said Patkilis to Pawnit, "you will see many houses on the
north side of it, and many on the south, where people are dancing; but
go to the north, and right in the middle of the village you will see a
big house, with the door toward the south. When you go in, don't let
the blind boy know that there are two of you. Let one talk to him
while the other takes the bags. The one talking will make him believe
that he came from the south side of the hill, where people are
dancing. When you are going in through the door, you will see the two
bags right opposite, both smooth and very full. Get those bags, so
that we can see what kind of place this is. We want plenty of light.
We want darkness, too, so that there may not be too much light."

Pawnit and Tsaik started off on their journey. How long the journey
lasted no one knows. They went beyond the sky and reached the eastern
hill, they saw the villages south and north of it, and heard a great
noise of dancing at the south. They went to the northern village,
found the big house in the middle of it, and stopped before the door.

"Go in," said Tsaik. "I will stay outside. I have a strap. I am going
to carry away the acorn baskets. You go in. I will stay here and tie
them together."

Pawnit went in and sat down on the west side. The blind boy was lying
on the east side.

"Well, blind boy," said Pawnit, "I am cold. I have been dancing. I
have come here to warm myself."

"I should like to know why you people come here while there is
dancing at the other side," said the blind boy.

Pawnit made no answer, but went out to see what Tsaik was doing.
"Where are you, Tsaik?" asked he.

"I am here making ready to carry acorns," answered Tsaik.

Just then they saw some one near them. "Who is this?" asked Pawnit.

"I am here," said Patkilis. "Come, Pawnit, you and I will go in and
get the two bags. You, Tsaik, take the acorns."

Tsaik put a big load on his back and started on, while the others were
in the house. Patkilis took daylight, and Pawnit took darkness. As
soon as they were outside the house, the blind boy stood up and
screamed,--

"Who was that? Some one has stolen something!"

He felt for the bags, then ran out and screamed,--

"Some one has stolen Puriwa and Sanihas! Some one has stolen Puriwa
and Sanihas! Some one has stolen Puriwa and Sanihas!"

The people who were dancing heard him and said, "Some one is
screaming!" Then they heard plainly,--

"Some one has stolen Puriwa and Sanihas! They have run west with
them!"

When they heard this, the dancers stopped dancing and ran west. Soon
they saw the three men racing off with the bags.

They saw Tsaik far ahead with a pack of acorns on his back. They
could see him a long way, for the pack was a big one. Pawnit and
Patkilis carried their bags in their hands. The people ran fast and
shouted to each other,--

"Catch them! Catch them! Do your best! Head them off! Surround them!"

They could not overtake Tsaik. He went through under the sky before
they could come up.

When Pawnit and Patkilis were rising from under the edge of the sky,
those behind were ready to seize Pawnit and would have caught him, but
he tore open the mouth of his bag, and that instant thick darkness
spread everywhere. No one could see; all were as if blind in one
moment.

The eastern people had to stop. They could follow no farther. Patkilis
knew the country west of the sky, and he and Pawnit stumbled on, came
along slowly in the dark, and groped westward a good while. At last
Patkilis opened his bag, and that moment daylight went out of it. They
could see a great distance; they were very glad now, travelled
quickly, and were soon at Norwinte's.

Keriha and Norwanchakus lived for a time with Norwinte (it is unknown
how long), and then took their net and went up the river to fish
downward. They went up Bohema Mem and Pui Mem as far as Panti Tsarau.

"Let us fish down from this, my brother," said Keriha. "I will hold
the end of the net stick that goes out in the river, so that I may
take the fish quickly when they are caught. You can go along the
bank."

They fished down to Nomlupi, and Keriha named all the places as he
and his brother came down. He gave them the names which they have now,
the names by which we Wintus call them. The first place below Panti
Tsarau was Lorus Pom and Keriha left no place unnamed between Panti
Tsarau and Nomlupi. They stopped at Nomlupi, built a brush house
there, and lived some time in it.

One day the two brothers went to Norwanbuli to the great sweat-house
where the woman Pom Norwanen Pitchen or Norwan lived.

"My brother, you must not make this woman angry," said Norwanchakus,
when they were near Norwanbuli. "This is a very powerful woman; she
has a great deal of food, a great deal to eat, but you must not take
anything; eat nothing except what she gives; don't talk much; do just
what I tell you."

"I will do what you tell me," said Keriha.

They went in at the south side of Norwanbuli, and stopped east of the
door. Norwanchakus sat down, and held Keriha between his knees. The
woman put her hand behind her, took acorn bread, held it toward the
brothers, and said,--

"Take this, you two men, eat it, and then go away."

"This woman has a great deal to eat," said Keriha. "Let's stay here a
while with her. Let's not go away, my brother."

"Be still," whispered Norwanchakus. "Don't talk."

"My brother, I'm hungry. Tell her to give us more bread. This isn't
enough."

Norwanchakus barely tasted the bread, but Keriha ate with great
relish. "Now, my brother," said Norwanchakus, "we must go. I will
carry you." He put his brother on his back, drew Keriha's arms around
his own neck closely, and started. When they were almost out of the
house, Keriha began to struggle and kick.

"Let me go, my brother," said he, "let me go!"

Norwanchakus held him firmly. Keriha pulled and pulled till he got his
right arm free. At the door was a large basket of acorns. He seized a
handful of those and kept them. Norwanchakus went out, and when a
short distance from the house he felt the ground swaying, rising, and
falling. He stopped and saw the earth open around him and sink slowly.
Then he made one great spring and came down on Bohem Buli. He was
barely on that mountain when it began to crack, and he was sinking
again. He made a second leap, and came down far away southwest.

Keriha dropped the acorns, and the earth stopped opening that moment.
The brothers stayed some time in the southwest, then went to Tsik
Tepji. This was a strong eddy of the river in which it was easy to
catch salmon. They made a brush hut at the river bank, and a house not
far from the river, on a hill. Norwanchakus caught a great many
salmon, and Keriha ate and ate; he ate all the time and never grew
larger. Norwanchakus scarcely ate anything. One morning Keriha was in
the house while his brother was fishing. A stranger came, a very
small man, no larger than a boy five years old. Keriha looked at him,
then jumped up and ran to his brother.

"Oh, my brother," said he, "some one has come to our house."
Norwanchakus said nothing.

"There is some one at our house," repeated Keriha.

"Did he say anything?" asked Norwanchakus.

"No."

"Did you talk to him?"

"No."

"Why not?"

"I don't like him, he is so little."

"Never mind, go back and give him something to eat; call him uncle."

Keriha went back and stared at the stranger. After a while the little
man looked up and asked,--

"Why do you look at me so? I left a small bag of roots north of the
house. Would you bring it here? The roots are very good to eat."

Keriha went. The bag was small. There were roots in one corner of it,
not many. He snatched at the bag, but could not lift it; he tried with
both hands, couldn't stir it; tried every way, couldn't move it;
scratched his arms and legs in trying, left the bag, and went back
without it.

"I cannot lift that bag," said he to the little man. "How did you
bring it, you are so small?"

The stranger, who was Nodal Monoko, went out, brought the bag to the
house in one hand, and put it down outside. Norwanchakus knew who the
stranger was, and he brought up a great sturgeon. Keriha cooked the
fish, put it down before their guest, and said, "Eat this."

The little man said nothing, waited till the fish was cool, then
raising it to his mouth in one hand, he swallowed all at a mouthful.

Keriha cooked for the little man all the forenoon, while Norwanchakus
was fishing. About midday their wood was nearly all burned.

"My uncle," said Keriha, "we are going to cook a great deal of fish.
Would you help me and bring wood?"

The little man said nothing.

"My uncle, will you bring wood for me?" asked Keriha.

The stranger sat a while, then went out to a mountain, took the
largest dry trees, pulled them up by the roots with one hand, put a
great many in a pile, and tore up two young green trees; with these he
bound the dry ones, and took them on his shoulder to Keriha.

Now Keriha saw what kind of person the little man was. He cooked
salmon and sturgeon till midnight without stopping, and still the
little man was hungry. Keriha cooked fish the whole night, and Nodal
Monoko ate till daylight.

Norwanchakus came up from the river next morning and said to the
little man, who looked as if he had eaten nothing,--

"My uncle, you wish to go home, I suppose. If you want fish, fill your
bag; it will hold a couple of good ones. The fish did not come up last
night very well, but I can give you enough to fill your bag."

So saying, Norwanchakus went back to the fishing-place. Nodal Monoko
went out and emptied his bag. When the roots were thrown out, there
was a pile of them many times higher and bigger than the house. It
covered all the open space, while some roots rolled down the hillside
and fell into the river.

Nodal Monoko's bag would hold mountains. He could put the whole world
into it. Nodal took his bag to the river, where Norwanchakus had been
fishing all night, and saw salmon in piles there.

"Take all the salmon you can," said Norwanchakus.

The stranger put two hundred salmon in one corner of his bag, two
hundred more in the other, two hundred in the middle--all large
fish--and the bottom of the bag was hardly covered. He twisted the top
of the bag then, and tied it. Nodal Monoko had a beaver-skin quiver.
In this he was carrying five great baskets of acorns, each basket
holding three bushels, and these acorns filled only the very tip of
the beaver tail.

He went down to the river to swim across.

"He cannot cross the river with that bag and quiver," said Keriha.

At the edge of the water Nodal Monoko took the bag and quiver in one
hand, and swam across with the other.

The two brothers stayed fishing at Tsik Tepji till a day when Keriha
said, "Let us go up the river, my brother." They went to Bohem Tehil
and stopped at a large tree. Keriha hung a salmon on a limb of it. "I
will watch this fish," said he "I'll see if Hubit comes here to eat
it."

He watched that day from dawn till dark; no one came. He watched five
days more; no one. Five other days, and five days more, and then five
days,--twenty-one in all; he saw no one.

Next morning he was waiting, when all at once he heard a noise, and
looking he saw Hubit come from the west and go to the salmon.
Norwanchakus sat some distance away, watching Keriha.

"Oh, my brother," cried Keriha, "Hubit has come. He is at the salmon.
What shall I do? I want to know where Hubit lives, I want to see his
house. I must follow him."

"My brother," answered Norwanchakus, "you say that you know more than
I. You think that you know everything. You must know what to do with
Hubit."

"Oh, my brother," said Keriha, "do not tease me. Tell me quickly what
I am to do with Hubit."

"Go straight south to a level place, get a pawit, and bring it. I will
watch Hubit while you are gone."

Keriha brought some pawit quickly. "Now what shall I do?"

"Stick one tuft in the salmon's tail, and fasten it well," said
Norwanchakus. "Let Hubit carry off the fish. You can see the tuft far
away, and follow."

Keriha fastened the tuft to the salmon, gave the fish to Hubit, and
watched. Hubit wouldn't bite, wouldn't taste. Keriha tried all day to
make him taste the salmon, tried a second day, tried five days. Hubit
wouldn't even bite it. On the sixth day Keriha said,--

"Hubit, why are you here? I thought you came to eat salmon, but now
you will not taste it."

Keriha talked five days more to Hubit, ten days in all. "Hubit, I wish
you would eat some fish and take home the rest." Hubit made no answer.

Five days more Keriha teased him, and then five days longer, twenty
days in all.

"Hubit," said Keriha on the twenty-first day, "tell me what you are
going to do; I'd like to know;" and he pushed him. Not a word from
Hubit. "Are you asleep or dead?" asked Keriha. "Hubit, you make me so
angry that I want to kill you."

All these days Keriha had watched Hubit from daylight till dark,
giving him no chance to steal the fish, and Hubit wanted salmon so
much that he would not go without it. Norwanchakus sat watching
Keriha.

"My brother," said Keriha, "I cannot make that Hubit take the salmon;
what shall I do? Tell me."

Norwanchakus said nothing.

"I am getting angry. If you cannot tell me what to do, I will kill
Hubit to-morrow."

"Why kill Hubit? You have teased him a long time; tease him a little
longer. How will you find Hubit's house, if you kill him?"

"Hubit, will you bite this salmon?" asked Keriha, next morning. "I
have bothered long enough. Will you bite to-day?" He put the salmon to
Hubit's mouth. Hubit bit a little. Keriha lifted the salmon with Hubit
on it, and threw it in the air to make Hubit fly. All came down like a
stone. Keriha threw it a second time. It fell again. He tried all day.

"I don't know what kind of man that Hubit is; he won't eat, he won't
talk, won't go home, won't do anything," said Keriha.

Next morning he said to Hubit: "Hubit, what kind of person are you? I
wish you would go home."

But Hubit wouldn't go without the salmon, and wouldn't take it for
fear that Keriha would follow him. Keriha threw him up again with the
salmon. Again he fell with the salmon, and he teased Hubit for five
days more. On the sixth morning Hubit began to eat.

"Ah, you are eating!" said Keriha; "will you go to-day?"

He threw the salmon; it fell again. Five days more he tried. Hubit
would eat, but wouldn't fly. Now he had tried twenty days more. On the
twentieth evening he said to Norwanchakus, "I will kill Hubit
to-morrow."

"Oh, you are not angry," said Norwanchakus. "Play with him a little
longer. You want to know everything, to see everything, to have
everything. You ought to find out what he means; he has some reason
for doing as he does."

Next morning Keriha went to Hubit. "Will you tell me what you are
going to do? Unless you tell me I will kill you. When I throw you up,
I will kill you unless you fly."

He threw up the salmon. Hubit moved his wings and flew along a little
above the ground, then settled down.

"Oh, he is going now, he is going! I'm so glad," cried Keriha; and he
threw the salmon a second time.

Hubit opened his wings and flew around Keriha, flew around the tree.

"Go, go!" cried Keriha, clapping his hands.

Hubit shot away toward the north, near the ground, and Keriha ran with
all speed, but Hubit went far ahead; then he flew a little toward the
west, turned, and darted off directly northward.

Keriha did not lose sight of him, but rose in the air and flew north,
going parallel with Hubit and going faster. He was at the sky first. A
moment later Hubit came.

"I am here before you!" cried out Keriha. "You cannot go out here!"

Hubit flew around a while and shot back to Bohem Tehil. Keriha was
just behind him.

"Hubit, you are so slow," called out Keriha. "I want to go fast, I
like to see you go fast."

Hubit flew around the tree a little, then darted to the south. Keriha
went a little to one side, was at the south before him, clapping his
hands.

"No escape on this side, Hubit; I am here before you."

Hubit turned to Bohem Tehil. From the tree he rushed east to where
the sky comes down. Keriha was there before him. He rushed to the
west, to where the sky comes down. Keriha was there before his face,
barring the way. Hubit had been at all four points,--no escape at any
of them; still he wouldn't drop the salmon. He turned a fifth time to
Bohem Tehil with Keriha behind him. He flew around the tree a few
times, then rose straight in the air, carrying the salmon. He rose
quickly, went very high. Keriha stood looking at Hubit, watched him
growing smaller and smaller. Keriha shaded his eyes.

Hubit was nearly out of sight. Keriha could barely see him with the
salmon and the tuft, a little spot in the sky. He looked very hard,
strained his eyes till blood was running down both his cheeks; still
he kept looking.

Hubit thought he was out of sight now, and soon Keriha saw him turn to
the west and come down. When he was above Bohem Buli, he dropped
straight to it on the north side and went in.

"I'm glad, I'm glad. Oh, I'm so glad!" cried out Keriha, clapping his
hands. "I know now where Hubit's house is. Get ready quickly, my
brother, we will go and see Hubit. Oh, you are so slow, my brother, I
can't wait for you. Come when you can; I'll go on alone."

Keriha hurried to Bohem Buli. Norwanchakus followed, and saw Keriha
doing strange things; didn't know what he was doing; wondered at him.
He was dodging from side to side, lying down and springing up again.
Norwanchakus went toward him.

"What are you doing?" cried he. "What is the matter!"

"Don't come so near," called Keriha. "Stop, stop!"

When Hubit dropped down to his house in Bohem Buli, he began that
minute to make it bigger. He was hurling out immense rocks, and Keriha
was dodging them. They came quickly one after another (there are many
of those rocks now all around Bohem Buli, at Puitiel Ton, at Waikidi
Pom, and on the west beyond Tayam Norel). After the rocks Hubit hurled
out great showers of earth; then he stopped.

"How shall I get at that Hubit?" asked Keriha of his brother.

"Go south to a level valley where sakkus grows. Get the tops of that
plant."

Keriha brought plenty of sakkus tops quickly.

"Go now to Halat Pom, in the east, and bring the longest vines
possible."

Keriha brought ten very long vines and made a rope of them, and tied
it around a great bundle of sakkus tops, to which he set fire, and
then lowered the bundle. He stopped the door with grass and sticks.
Soon there was a great rumbling, struggling, and roaring in Hubit's
house. After a while it stopped and all was still.

"Now, my brother," said Keriha, "Hubit is dead, and I am going to have
his honeycombs."

He took a large sharp stone, drew a great circle around the entrance
to Hubit's house, and said: "You, Hubit's honeycomb, be as large as
this circle is. Now, my brother," said he, "you can go to Bohem
Tehil. I will come soon."

Norwanchakus went home. Keriha began to dig, found many combs, dug
till night, stayed all night in Hubit's house--stayed there digging
honey and eating, for twenty-five days.

Norwanchakus waited at home for his brother, waited that evening till
midnight, waited till morning, saw no sign of Keriha. He waited the
next day; then two, three, five days; then twenty days more.

"Well," said Norwanchakus, "I can do nothing. Perhaps he is dead,
perhaps he is working yet."

On the twenty-sixth night after Hubit's death, some one came into the
house. Norwanchakus looked up. It was Keriha.

After that the two brothers went to Puri Buli. At the foot of the
mountain they saw some one half sitting, half lying, and looking at
them. When they came nearer, it went into an opening.

"My brother," said Keriha, "I want that."

"Nothing can pass you," said the elder brother. "You want everything.
You would better let this go."

Keriha paid no heed to Norwanchakus: he split the earth with his
little finger and killed the stranger, a Supchit. He skinned the body
and said, "I think that this skin will be warm; I will sleep on it."

"My brother," said Norwanchakus, "you are the only person who has ever
killed a Supchit--you may be sorry."

Next morning a terrible snow came. It snowed five days and nights;
everything was buried under snow. Keriha and Norwanchakus lay
twenty-one days under the snow without food. On the twenty-first
night, the Supchit woman whom Keriha had killed came and stole him
away.

Next morning Norwanchakus looked outside. Keriha was gone; the snow
was gone. He looked for tracks, looked all day, found no tracks. He
searched five days, ten, twenty days--searched all the mountains, went
down the rivers, up the rivers, north, south, east, west. He searched
one year, found neither track nor trail; searched ten years, then ten
years more; inquired of every one in all the world--no one knew of
Keriha.

At last he went back to the house where Keriha had been lost to see if
there was track or trail there. Behind Keriha's sleeping-place he saw
a large stone. He raised it, found an opening and a passage sloping
northward, saw tracks made when the Supchit woman took Keriha away. He
went into the passage, followed the trail till he came to the top of
Bohem Puyuk. He came out on the top, went in again and followed a
trail going south; followed it, winding west and east, till he came
out at Waikidi Pom. There he saw tracks on the ground, lost them,
found them again, found them going under the ground, travelled under
the ground, came out, lost and found tracks till he lost them for
good.

He inquired in the west for five years without finding trail or
tidings of Keriha. At last he said,--

"I have asked every one in this world, except my two cousins Lasaswa
at Lasan Holok."

He turned east, then, and went to Lasan Holok, near Pas Puisono,
where he found a big house with a door on the south side. One old man
was sitting on the east, and another on the west side of the door. The
house was full of people. The two old men were rubbing their thighs
and rolling something. All the people inside were doing the same, all
were making ropes.

Five years before these old men had heard that Norwanchakus had lost
his brother. All people had been telling one another that Norwanchakus
was looking for Keriha. As soon as the old men heard of this, they
began to make ropes.

Norwanchakus stood in the door, and raised one foot to walk in.

"Don't step this way; step east," said the old man on the west.

"Don't step this way; step west," said the old man on the east.

"I'll go straight ahead," thought Norwanchakus.

"Don't come this way! Don't come this way!" cried all those in front.

One small boy was sitting behind all the others. As shreds of fibre
dropped from the hands of those in front, he picked them up and
twisted them into a rope.

"I suppose you have been travelling a long time, my grandson," said
the old man on the west side of the door.

"I have travelled a very long time, and have come at last to talk with
you. I have asked all who live on this earth about my brother, and no
one can tell me where Keriha is."

"We heard about your brother five years ago," said the old men, "and
we told our sons to make ropes because you had lost Keriha."

"How much rope have you made?"

"We can tell to-morrow."

Next morning they cleared a broad space in front of the house. While
they were doing this, Norwanchakus said to the rope-makers,--

"I wish you would send for Tsiwihl, an old man near by here."

They brought him quickly. After Tsiwihl came, Norwanchakus said,--

"I want some of you young men to try to go up and ask Sas if he knows
where my brother is. I think Sas must know."

"I will try first," said the old man at the western side of the door;
"I think that I have the longest rope."

"I will give you something for Sas," said Norwanchakus. "Here is an
arrow-straightener, a headband of silver gray-fox skin, and a
fire-drill. If you go to the top of the sky, you will see a road from
east to west. Sit at the south side of it under a tobacco tree which
is there. Soon Sas will come from the east, going west. He will stop
at the tree. Give him the three things."

The old man brought out a great coil of rope to unwind and go up with
it.

"Who is to stand and watch?" asked the other old man.

"Tsiwihl," said Norwanchakus.

Tsiwihl put oak leaves near the coil, lay on them, and looked up. Old
Lasaswa took one end of his rope, pulled it, and started. The rope was
unwinding, and he was going up. Tsiwihl kept his eyes on Lasaswa.
After a while he said, "Lasaswa is half-way up." A little later he
said, "He is more than half-way up!"

"But the rope is gone," said Norwanchakus.

"Lasaswa is coming down," said Tsiwihl.

The old man came to the ground. "My rope is too short. Some one else
must try now," said he.

"I will try," said the other old man. This one had more rope. Five men
had to help him roll it out of the house, there was so much. He took
the presents for Sas and began to go up.

Tsiwihl watched closely. The rope was unwinding and Lasaswa was going
up. "He is half-way up!" said Tsiwihl; "he is near where the first man
was." Tsiwihl moved his head a little, but never lost sight of
Lasaswa. "He is as high as the other was; he is higher; he is going
still higher!"

"But the rope has given out," said Norwanchakus.

"He is coming down!" cried Tsiwihl.

All were looking at the sky except the small boy, who was inside
making rope as before.

"We are old," said the second Lasaswa; "our ropes are too short. You
young men must try to-morrow."

Each old man had nine sons. Each person was one day making the
trial--all were twenty days trying--no one had a rope long enough.
"What shall we do now?" asked the old men on the twenty-first day.

"There is a boy in the house making rope yet; let him try," said
Norwanchakus.

"Oh, he is only playing. He hasn't much rope; he just makes ropes of
the shreds that others throw away," said one of the old men.

"Go in and ask him," said the second old man.

Norwanchakus went in and said, "You are a small boy, but will you try
your rope for me?" and he took hold of the boy's hand. He kept his
rope in a little basket. When Norwanchakus took his hand, he seized
the basket with the other hand and carried it out.

"Why do they bring out that little boy?" cried the young men. "He
hasn't any rope. We had long ropes, and all were too short; his rope
is only to play with."

"My cousin," said Norwanchakus, "you are small, but I think you know
something. Here are three presents. When you reach the sky, give them
to Sas." Then he told him what to do.

When Norwanchakus had finished, the boy bowed his head and said "Yes"
to him. "You men have long ropes, but they were too short. My rope may
not reach the sky, but I will try;" and he started.

Tsiwihl's breast and stomach were as blue now as the sky, and blood
was trickling from his eyes, he had looked so long and so hard. After
the boy was some distance up, those below could not see him, and they
said to Tsiwihl, "Tell us, tell us often what he is doing."

After a while Tsiwihl said: "He is almost as high as the others were.
He is as high; he is as high as the highest was."

They looked at his rope. There seemed to be more than when he started.
It seemed to grow all the time.

"He is higher than any--he is going and going."

"Do not lose sight of him," said Norwanchakus.

Tsiwihl's eyes were full of blood.

"How much rope is there?" asked Norwanchakus.

"Oh, there is plenty of rope," cried the others.

"He is going and going," said Tsiwihl.

"How far up is he? Can you see him?"

"He is high, very high, almost as high as I can see--he is nearly at
the sky."

"He will go to it, he will go to it!" cried some.

"He is at the sky," said Tsiwihl. "He is there, he is there! He has
his hand on it--he is on the top of it--he is there!"

There was plenty of rope on the ground yet.

"Well," said one of the old men, "he is on the sky. He never talked
much, that little boy, or seemed to know much, but he has gone to a
place where we could not go."

The sun was almost half-way up in the sky. Tsiwihl lay watching,
watching, looking hard. Sas had passed the middle of the sky when
Tsiwihl said: "I see the boy. He is coming down, he is coming nearer
and nearer."

Soon all could see him. At last he was standing on the ground.

"Now, my cousin," said Norwanchakus, "tell me. Let me know what you
saw and what you heard. What do you think of that country up there?"

"I went to the top," said the boy. "The country up there is good. I
saw a road from east to west. I went east a little, and at the south
of the road saw a tobacco tree. I sat under the tree and looked east.
Far off I saw an old man coming with a pack on his back. I sat
watching him. At last he came to where I was and passed without
looking at me, went forward a little, stopped, put down his pack on
the south side of the road, and then came toward me. I was sitting
with my face to the north. He sat down at my left side, looked at me,
looked at the headband, the fire-drill, and the straightener, and
laughed. 'What are you doing here?' asked he. 'From what place are
you? How did you come up to this land, where no one ever travels but
me, where I have never seen any one? You are small. How could you come
here?' 'I am here,' answered I, 'because Norwanchakus sent me. He sent
me because he has lost his brother, Keriha. He has looked for him all
over the world, has asked every one, and no one knows about Keriha. He
sent me here to ask you about Keriha. He said that you must know, for
you look over the whole world, see all people, see everything.' I put
the three things down before him and said, 'Norwanchakus told me to
give you these things for your trouble in telling about Keriha.' Sas
smiled again, took up the headband, the fire-drill and straightener,
held them in his hand, and said: 'These are good--I know all that is
passing in the world. I know where Keriha is. I have seen him every
day since he went from his brother--I know where he is now. The
Supchit woman took him one night, took him under the ground, came out
on the top of Bohem Puyuk, went down again, came out, travelled by
crooked roads westward, crossed the bridge made of one hair, went
under the sky to the other side, to the middle house in a large
village. She put Keriha in a little room in that house; he has been
there ever since, he is there now. He is very weak and will die
to-morrow unless some one saves him. Tell Norwanchakus to start
to-night and be there in the morning if he wants to save Keriha.'"

"Then Sas put his hand in his bosom and took out a kolchi bisi [sky
cap], gave it to me, and said, 'Take this to Norwanchakus, and tell
him to give it to Tsiwihl for his trouble.' Sas gave me also a piece
of the sky. 'This is for Tsiwihl, too,' said he; 'let him wear it on
his breast for a blue facing.'"

Norwanchakus gave these to Tsiwihl, and then made him a blanket of oak
leaves. He wears all these things to this day.

"My cousin, are you sure that Sas said this?" asked Norwanchakus.

"I am sure. Sas told me all this."

"Wait now, my cousin." Norwanchakus went northeast, stretched his hand
out; an armful of kúruti (silkweed which grows at the end of the
world) came on it. "Now, my cousin," said he, "I will pay you well
for your trouble. All your life you can make as much rope as you like
of this kúruti, and you can go up on it anywhere,--north, south, east,
or west."

Norwanchakus started at midnight, and went westward quickly. He knew
the way well. He crossed ridges and valleys, passed places where he
had found tracks of Keriha and lost them, went to the bridge of one
hair, sprang from the bank to the middle of the bridge. The bridge
swayed and swayed. Underneath was a wide, rushing river, but
Norwanchakus did not fall. With one spring more he touched the other
bank, ran swiftly till he reached the big village beyond the sky. He
saw the chief house, ran in through its door at the east, went to the
little room, and found Keriha with his head on the palm of the Supchit
woman's hand. He caught his brother and rushed out, shot past all the
people, and stopped only when he was far outside the village.

"Now, my brother," said he, "you told me always that you knew
something great, that you wanted to do something great, that you
wanted to be something great. What have you been doing here thirty
years? I have looked for you everywhere. You never let me know where
you were."

"Oh, my brother," said Keriha, "I am so drowsy, I was sleeping, I
didn't know where I was."

Norwanchakus crossed the river at a bound, without touching the bridge
of one hair. He went on then, never stopped till he reached Keri Buli.

Next morning at daybreak Keriha heard a voice from above. The voice
said,--

"Leave that place, Norwanchakus and Keriha. The world will change
soon. You two must come here. Leave that place down there quickly."

"Now, my brother," said Keriha, "you are so slow, I don't know where
you wish to go, or what you want to do."

"My brother," said Norwanchakus, "I will do the best I can, and do you
do the best you can. We have finished our work here. People to come
will know the names that you gave to rivers, mountains, rocks, and
hills. Hereafter they will call these places by the names we gave
them."

While in this world Keriha wore a duck-skin, and when they were ready
to go he threw off this skin on the other side of Bohema Mem, and from
it have come all the ducks on the rivers of this country.

Norwanchakus had always carried his ash stick from the fish-net. When
he was going, he thrust it into the ground at Tsarau Heril. "I will
leave this here," said he, "and people to come will make pipes of it."
There is plenty of ash to this day in Tsarau Heril.

At the other side of the sky the brothers parted. Norwanchakus went up
on high, and stayed there. Keriha went far away to the east, and is
living there now.




KELE AND SEDIT


PERSONAGES

After each name is given that of the creature or thing into which the
personage was changed subsequently.

=Hinwu=, big owl; =Kele=, mountain wolf; =Kleréu Lulimet=, wild lily;
=Pili Lúlimet=, reed grass blossom; =Pokok=, ground owl; =Pom Piweki=,
crooked land; =Satok Pokaila=, ----; =Sas=, the sun; =Tsurat=,
red-headed woodpecker; =Tunhlucha=, frog.

       *       *       *       *       *

In Puidal Winnem lived Kele. Olelbis built a great sweat-house there,
and told him to stay in it. Kele was old and lived all alone in that
place; lived there a long time, thinking, making up his mind what to
do,--he was lonely and thirsty. "Why did Olelbis put me here?" thought
he.

Once he rose about daybreak, hurried out, went westward, went to a
creek. A great clump of mountain maples stood near the bank. Kele saw
a straight stick among all the others. He cut the stick, drew it out,
and took off a short piece. On the way home he split the stick,
smoothed it, and fixed it as he walked. He put the two sticks overhead
in the sweat-house, went out a second time, found a white oak sapling,
firm and strong, cut a piece two feet long from it, put it at the
hearth. The next day he lay with his back to the fire, lay there all
night without sleeping. Just before daybreak he heard steps, and was
struck on the back. A minute later he was struck again in the same
place. The old man rose then and made a good fire of manzanita wood.

It was daylight, and Kele said: "My children, come to the fire, warm
yourselves, sweat, and then swim in the creek."

Two girls came to the fire, warmed themselves standing, and soon they
were sweating from heat.

"My daughters," said Kele, "there is a creek near here. Go and swim in
it."

These girls were from the stick that Kele had split in two parts and
put in the house wall. The girls bathed in the creek, came back, and
were good-looking. When they came in, Kele brought venison for his two
daughters to eat.

"My daughters," said the old man, "I will tell you something. You must
go to work, do good things. There are roots in the woods all around
us, roots fit for food. You need to walk. Go out and get roots." They
went out to dig wild lily roots. After that they went every morning.

Soon they began to say: "We should like to have other food; we should
like to have game to eat. We saw mountain quail to-day; we saw deer."
At last they talked this way every night. Kele listened, thinking what
to do. These girls had a nice bed made of skins, and they talked every
night to each other; but one night they went to bed early and fell
asleep right away. Kele had wished them to sleep; that is why they
fell asleep quickly. He hurried down to some mountain-ash trees, went
to the middle of them, and cut off five sticks. He whittled these,
made them smooth, cut each in two. He had ten smooth sticks then. Next
he cut five other sticks. These he left rough; cut them also in two;
had ten of them. Kele placed the twenty sticks overhead in the house
on the north side, and lay with his back to the fire. The fire was a
good one, a hot manzanita fire. His club of green oak was there at the
fireplace.

Kele lay without sleeping and waited. He was awake and was thinking.
The two girls were sound asleep all the time. Just before daybreak he
heard a sound as if some barefooted person had sprung from above to
the floor. Next moment some one took the club and struck him. Another
came down in the same way and struck him. Ten times he was struck with
the club.

The ten smooth sticks had turned into people. Each man gave him a
blow, went to the wall of the house, and sat there. Kele did not rise
yet. He heard some one barefoot jump down and seize the club. This one
hit Kele once. A second one sprang down and hit him twice, a third
three times, a fourth four times, and so on to the tenth, who struck
him ten times. There were twenty in all; ten from the smooth and ten
from the rough sticks.

The first ten sticks he had whittled smooth, and they made ten good
sons, but from the ten untrimmed sticks came ten rough, uproarious
sons. Kele hadn't smoothed them, and they struck him many times. When
the tenth rough son struck him the last blow, Kele stood up and made a
big fire; he could barely move, he had been so beaten with the club.
He lay down then and said,--

"Now, my boys, come here; warm yourselves, dance and sweat, then go to
the creek to swim, and come here again." He sang then, and made his
sons dance. The boys danced, and hurried to the creek to swim,
shouting as they went. They came back to the sweat-house good-looking
persons.

The two girls rose now. They knew already what their father had done.

"Go, my daughters, and cook for your brothers," said Kele.

The two sisters made the food ready and placed it before their
brothers.

"Now, my sons, eat what we have," said Kele. "You will go out after
that, you will hunt, and bring game."

The first ten, the smooth men, had good sense; the second ten were
inferior; the ninth and tenth of the second ten were very bad. The
first ten took each only one mouthful; of the second ten, the first
took one mouthful, the second two, the third three, and so on to the
tenth, who took ten mouthfuls. After that they sat back and made ready
to go out.

"What are we to do?" asked the first ten. "We have nothing to hunt
with."

Kele brought out bows and quivers with arrows, and gave them to each;
gave five ropes to them also, ropes of grass fibre. "You are armed
now," said Kele; and he showed them where to set snares for deer.

They went far down to the foot of the mountain and set snares. The
ten smooth brothers stood on the mountain top; the second ten, who
were rough, drove the deer. "You must shout so that we can hear you
all the time," said the smooth brothers. Toward evening the smooth
brothers saw deer in the snares. The smooth ten took the bodies, the
best of the game; the rough ten the legs, ears, horns, all the poor
parts. The smooth ten took the best meat to the house; the rough ten
made a great uproar--they had little sense. The two sisters cooked
roots and venison for all.

Next morning Kele made a big fire of manzanita wood. "Be up, my boys,"
called he. "Go and swim." That day the twenty stayed at home, and the
sisters went for roots.

They lived this way a long time, the brothers hunting, the sisters
digging roots and cooking, till at last the sisters wished to see
other persons besides their brothers. One day when they went for roots
they sat down on the mountain slope. "What are we to do?" said one
sister; "we wish to see people, we see no one now but our brothers and
father."

That evening, when all had lain down, the elder sister went to Kele
and sat near him. "My father," said she, "I wish to know my name."

"Your name is Klereu Lulimet," said Kele; "your sister's name is Pili
Lulimet."

She told her sister what their names were. Both liked the names, and
were glad to have them. Every day the men sweated and swam, killed
deer and snared them. The sisters dug lily roots and cooked them.

One time instead of digging roots they went high on the mountain side
and sat there, sat looking westward. They could see very far, and
things seemed right there before them, though away off near the edge
of the great western water.

This was the first time that the sisters had a chance to see far. Till
that day they had only a mountain slope or a forest opening in front
of them; now they had the whole country to look at. Just after midday
they saw a man going northward, going slowly.

"What a nice man that is! Look at him," said one sister to the other.

He stopped all at once, seemed to sit down and disappear through the
earth. That day they saw him no more.

"Oh, we should like to see that man," said the sisters, "and talk to
him." They watched, talked, and forgot to dig roots. At last, a short
time before sunset, they said, "Let us go for roots!" They ran down
the mountain, dug a basketful quickly, and hurried home.

"Oh, father, will you teach us how to sing?" said the younger sister
to Kele that evening. "We tried all day to sing. I tried to teach my
sister, she tried to teach me. We could do nothing."

"You can sing this way," said Kele, and he began,--

    "O wi, no á, O wi, no í,
    O wi, no á, O wi, no í."

"That is good," said she, going away. She said nothing to her sister
and lay down.

Soon after the twenty brothers came. Ten of them made a great noise.
The house just trembled and shook from the uproar. The second ten had
smeared themselves with deer blood, hung deer entrails around their
necks. They looked wild and ferocious. When inside, they were quiet;
in going out and coming in they always rushed and shouted.

Next morning Kele kept the twenty brothers in the sweat-house. "Rest a
day," said he.

The sisters went to the mountain top and looked westward. Soon they
saw some one go toward the north, as on the first day.

"Did our father tell you how to sing?" asked the elder sister.

"He did, but I have forgotten."

She tried to remember the song, and soon after it came to her,--

    "O wi, no á, O wi, no í,
    O wi, no á, O wi, no í."

"This is the way our father sang," said she. "You try it, sister."

The elder began; soon both sang together.

"Oh, we have a nice song now," said they.

Their song went straight to where the man was, a long distance. This
man was Sedit. He was getting red earth for acorn bread. Water soaked
through red earth was used to moisten acorn meal. Sedit was covered
with shells. He was very splendid to look at. As he dug the earth, it
seemed to him that he heard something. He stopped, listened, listened
with all his ears. The sisters stopped singing, and he dug again;
again he heard the singing and stopped. When he stopped, the sisters
ceased to sing; when he dug, they began again. Thus it continued the
whole afternoon. They kept Sedit all day there doing little, almost
nothing.

Sometime before sunset the sisters dug their roots and went home.
Sedit went home too. He lived at the house of Satok Pokaila.

"What were you doing? I waited all day, forenoon and afternoon, for
you. It is too late to make bread now," said Satok.

This old woman lived alone till Sedit in his wanderings came to her
and worked, brought wood, and dug red earth for her.

"I got a headache," said he, "and had to lie down all day nearly."

"I am sorry," said the old woman; and she gave him food, but he did
not want any. Next day Sedit went for red earth. He did not eat much
that morning. He had not slept all the night. He was thinking of that
song on the mountain.

That day the sisters went to the mountain top, looked westward. Soon
Sedit came to the same place and worked, put two or three handfuls in
his basket, heard singing, heard it plainly, stopped, strained his
eyes to see who was singing, saw no one. Again he dug, again they
sang; again he stopped work, again they ceased singing; again he
worked, again they sang. Sedit thinks now how to follow the singers,
tries to whistle their music--cannot catch it--looks around, sees no
one. "Well, I must sing," says he. He sings, and this time he catches
the music.

The sisters sang now in response to him. They moved on, as he
thought, and he followed. But they were not moving, they stayed in one
place. They simply made their singing seem farther each time.

Sedit followed till they stopped at last, would not sing any longer.
He could not tell what to do. "It is better for me to go back to my
basket," said he at last. He went back, put his basket on the bank
east of the pit, and said: "Now, my basket, I will leave you a while,
I am going away. I place you east of the pit. Rootstick, I place you
east of the basket. If Satok Pokaila asks where I am, you will move
east, basket, and you will fall east, rootstick. She will know which
way I went."

He went eastward, went a short distance, forgot the song, stopped,
thought what to do. The song then came back to him. The sisters began
to sing again. Sedit followed their song.

Satok Pokaila waited for red earth, waited till midday, then thought,
"I'll go and see if Sedit has a headache." She found the basket partly
filled with red earth, and the stick standing east of it. She looked
in the pit where Sedit had dug, and thought, "He must be here
somewhere." She searched, but could not find him.

"Where is Sedit?" asked she of the basket. "Where did he go?--Where is
Sedit?" asked she of the rootstick.

The basket moved eastward till it reached the stick, the stick fell
toward the east. Old Satok knew now what had happened. She took the
basket and digging-stick home with her, put them up safely.

Sedit followed the sisters, sang himself, and listened to their song.
The song went southward, went away from the mountain. He followed till
he reached Tayam Norel. Sedit sat down. People asked where he came
from, where he was going. He would not tell, would not talk, did not
care for people's words. He thought of nothing, heard nothing but the
song of Kele's daughters.

He sat only a little while, and went away singing and listening to the
song of the sisters. Now it went eastward. He followed it to a
mountain, where he saw an old man setting a trap. This was old Pokok.

"Uncle, where are you going in such a great hurry?" asked Pokok.

"I am going east," replied Sedit. "You will not see me pass this way
again."

He hurried down the mountain, crossed a creek, and went straight up
another mountain; was just at the top, when he saw a very big man
coming toward him on the right hand as Sedit was going east. Sedit
stopped, looked, was afraid somewhat. The two stared at each other.
The stranger was very tall and very thick. Sedit was frightened. The
big man never stopped, went straight ahead westward. Sedit looked at
him a long time, didn't move, watched him going down the mountain.
After he had gone Sedit stood a long time, and then sat down.

"Why did he not speak to me?" thought Sedit. "He is the first person
I have met who wouldn't speak to me. Who is he? I should like to
know."

Sedit sat and thought all that day about the big man. He heard the
song always, at times very near him, but he thought so much about the
big man that he didn't follow it. He wondered if the big man would
come again, and said to himself, "I will wait and see."

About night Sedit thought, "If he comes and will not speak to me, I'll
kill him." All night he waited. He rose very early, had not slept any.
About sunrise he saw a man coming from afar, from the east, moving
westward. Sedit watched, had his bow and arrows ready. It was he who
would not speak the day before. Sedit shot him in the breast, shot
again. The big man paid no heed, passed right along. Sedit shot twenty
arrows. The stranger looked all the time at Sedit, said nothing. Sedit
shot twenty arrows more--spent all his arrows.

After he had shot away the forty arrows, and the man had passed right
close to him, Sedit sat down and thought, "Who is this that I cannot
kill him?" He thought a long time, and then knew that he must be Sas
Kiemila.

It was old Sas. Sas had been fooling Sedit, just as Kele's daughters
had fooled him.

Sedit heard the song again, and followed it. He went to the Bohema Mem
at Sawal Pom, went up Norken Mem till he came to Hin Pom where he
heard a great noise. Many people were dancing there.

"Oh, there is Sedit coming," said they. "Where is he going so fast?"

"Uncle, where are you going in such a great hurry?" asked one of the
men. "What news have you? Tell us what you have seen on your journey."

"I am travelling this country to look at it. I saw no one, can give
you no tidings of any one. I shall not pass this way again."

The man who spoke and the dancers were Hinwa people. Sedit rushed on,
came to a flat, saw a spring, and many persons drinking water.

"My grandsons, what are you doing, why do you drink so much water?
Water is bad for young people" (these people were birds of all sorts).
Sedit called the place Chilchil balus (bird drinking). He went on
without stopping or talking,--had no time for either. He listened,
heard the singing near a hill, ran there; heard talking of many
people, the Tsurats arguing about acorns.

Sedit passed these people, crossed the Norken Mem, ran along the
trail, came to an old man lying across it at the foot of a mountain.
Sedit, going fast, thought to jump over the old man, but he moved, and
Sedit stopped. "Grandson, what are you doing?" asked Sedit. This was
Pom Piweki. "I cannot tell what to do," said Pom. "I am old, I cannot
travel; so I lay down here."

"I will go on," said Sedit, "and come back this way, I think." He
heard the song nearer now; followed it, followed till sunset, when it
ceased. He stayed all night in that place.

Next morning, some time after sunrise, the song began again. Sedit
answered, and followed it. Then it ceased; he stopped again; then the
song began a second time; he followed; the song ceased. The song
circled around the mountain, going a little higher gradually;
sometimes it was near, sometimes it seemed far away, but he never came
up to it.

After wandering ten days, perhaps, he reached the top of the mountain
by going round and round the side of it. The singing was in the
mountain now all the time. He was on the highest part of Kele's
sweat-house. Kele, his twenty sons, and two daughters were inside, and
the girls and old man knew that some one was walking on the roof of
their sweat-house. Kele's sons went out each morning, and so did his
daughters. Although they were many, Sedit never saw one of them,--they
fooled him. At last, when Sedit was on the mountain, Kele shouted,--

"If any one is on my house, let him go down to the western door of
it."

Sedit heard, and went back the way by which he came. He went to Pom
Piweki and asked: "Do you know where the door to this sweat-house is?"

Pom Piweki made no answer. He stood up and pulled open a door; it
seemed as though he had been lying across the entrance. When he opened
the door, Sedit saw far into the house.

"Sedit, if you are here to go in, this is the way for you," said Pom
Piweki. "You will see an old man lying on the east side, go to him and
talk; this is his sweat-house."

Sedit went in and sat down near Kele, said nothing. Kele rose up and
gave Sedit food, talked to him, told him what kind of person he, Kele,
was, and about his children, and said: "Sedit, if you have come here
to stay, you must do what I tell you; you must be careful. I have
rough sons; if they know that you are here, they will make trouble. I
will hide you. They will make a noise, but you will not suffer if you
keep quiet; if you move, they will find you, and abuse you, surely."

Kele put Sedit in a basket in the ground, hid him there, leaving a
small hole to look through. "You may look out, but do not move," said
Kele.

As soon as Sedit was hidden the girls came in with roots, and sat down
at their sleeping-place. Sedit was near them. He thrust out his hand
and pinched the younger sister. She said nothing.

"Sister, have you seen any one?" asked she, after a time; "some one
pinched me."

"'Sh!" said the elder, "be quiet and say nothing; don't let our father
hear."

The elder went to cook, and Kele's twenty sons came hammering and
tramping.

The first ten, the smooth ones, came, as always, quietly; the second
ten came with a rush and an uproar. Sedit peeped out at them.

The younger sister pushed him back. "Be still," said she.

Sedit tried to rise; she kept him down.

The first man of the second ten cried, "Pshu! I smell Sedit."

The second said, "Pshu! I smell Sedit; throw him out!"

"Be quiet, boys; don't talk so," said Kele. "Sedit is your uncle."

"Phew! I smell Sedit," cried all the second ten.

Kele could hardly keep his sons from taking Sedit. After they had
eaten they grew more excited. "Where is Sedit?" cried they. "Let us
find Sedit!"

At last they found Sedit, dragged him out, played ball with him, threw
him around the whole night from one side of the great house to the
other. Kele could do nothing, could not stop them. He went and lay
down. About sunrise Sedit screamed. He was almost dead. Kele's ten
rough sons were covered with deer blood and shouted all night. The
smooth ten sat still, could do nothing against the rough ten.

About sunrise Sedit could hardly breathe. He had a root under his left
arm, and as he was hurled across the house it fell into the fire and
made a great smoke. The odor was very pleasant. Kele's sons liked it.
They threw Sedit back to where they found him, left him, and began to
breathe in the smoke.

"My sons," said Kele, "I told you last night not to hurt or harm
Sedit; let him alone. That root which he dropped will be good for you,
and hereafter you will like it. Future people when going to hunt will
take this root, tsarauhosi, hold it out, and say, 'Kele, give us
deer.' They will give you the root, and you will give them deer. When
they go hunting and have bad luck, they will make a fire, burn this
root, hold it out while it smokes, and say, 'Kele, will you put deer
where we can see and kill them?'" (Wintu hunters carry this root and
burn it if they have bad luck in finding deer. Kele likes the odor and
sends them deer). Kele rubbed Sedit with deer marrow, put him on the
west side of the sweat-house, and said, "This is your place; you will
stay here."

The boys went to hunt, the girls to dig roots as before.

"How did you get those sons, brother?" asked Sedit once.

"You have no need to know; I will not tell you," replied Kele.

"How did you build this house? Two old men should not live in one
house. If I had a house, your sons could visit me when they wished,
see their uncle's house, and stay all night, perhaps."

"I don't think you could have sons, Sedit, or keep a house. I don't
believe you have strength for it; these things are hard to do," said
Kele.

But Sedit talked on about sons and a sweat-house. Kele asked Sedit to
sing for his sons while they danced and sweated. He sang twice and
sang fairly. "I could sing well if I had a house and sons of my own,"
remarked Sedit.

"I will build a sweat-house for him," thought Kele, at last. "He may
go through as I have. I don't think he will, but I can let him try."

The next night Kele made all sleep soundly. He went north a short
distance and wished for a sweat-house. A mountain stood in front of
him next moment. Kele went home before daylight and lay down. That day
Sedit talked on as before.

"Come," said Kele; and he took him to the new mountain. "You can live
here if you like. This is your house." Kele left him then.

Sedit made a fire, found a pipe and tobacco, smoked, stayed many days
and nights by himself there. "I should like to know how Kele got his
sons," thought he one night. "I must ask him."

"I come to tell you," said Sedit one morning, "that I am lonesome. I
want to know how you got your sons and daughters."

Kele made no answer for a long time. At last he told him how he got
his daughters.

Sedit went home, did exactly as Kele had done, then lay down without
sleeping. Toward morning he heard some one jump to the floor; next he
got a blow on the back, then a second. The two persons went away and
sat down. Sedit rose, made a big fire, and began singing for a
sweat-dance. Two girls stood near the fire, sweated, then went to the
creek, swam, and went home. They had very long hair and were nice
looking. Sedit gave them wooden combs and mink-skins for their hair,
gave them food and nice baskets painted red, told each to dig roots
and cook them.

Sedit lived a while with his daughters, till he thought once, "I want
to have sons." He went to Kele, and Kele told how he had got sons,
told carefully.

Sedit cut the sticks, did everything as Kele said, and lay by the
fire, but he could not keep from looking up; the moment he looked all
the sticks fell to the ground. Sedit put them in place again, lay by
the fire, looked up. The sticks fell a second time; he put them up
again, lay down, looked a third time. The sticks fell a third time. He
was putting the sticks up till daylight, when he had to stop. Sedit
went to Kele that day. "My sticks were falling all night," said he.

Kele knew what had happened already. "Why not do as I told you? I told
you not to look up."

"I will not look any more," said Sedit.

Next night he put up sticks again and waited, took the blows till the
last one of the second ten was giving him ten blows, then he sprang up
and screamed. All the twenty sons dropped down and were sticks again.
It was just daylight. Sedit gathered the sticks into a basket, and
looked to see if the girls were awake. They were sticks as well as the
others.

Sedit felt very sorry, could not tell what to do. He put the two
sticks with the other twenty, took one at a time, held it up, and
said, "This was my son, this was my daughter." He was sorry and
wondered if he could make others. He went to Kele and said,--

"My brother, I could not stand it."

"What did I tell you?"

"Can I not make more?"

"Perhaps you cannot endure it." Kele did not want him to try.

"I am sorry for my girls," said Sedit, "I want them back; I was fond
of them."

"You may try for sons, but those girls will not come back."

Sedit tried a third time. The beating was so hard that he almost
screamed; but he held out this time, and had twenty sons. Sedit's
house was full of sons, but he had no daughters; the sticks would not
turn to girls again, though he did with them as he had the first time.

Sedit sent his sons to hunt. "Go wherever you like," said he. "On the
west side is a ridge; go on that ridge, keep in one line, and when you
turn some one may see you and think, 'What a crowd of nice boys!'"

Kele's boys were hunting that day, and saw Sedit's sons in a long
line. "Look at that row of men on the ridge," said they. "Those are
our cousins," said one of the smooth ten; "those are Sedit's sons."

Sedit's sons went to a flat, danced and played all the day, took
yellow clay, made paste of it, painted themselves yellow--that is why
coyotes are yellow to this day; the paint would not wash off. All went
home in a line. Sedit had supper for them.

"Why do you come without deer?" asked Sedit.

"We danced on the flat and painted."

Sedit said nothing. All ate; then Sedit thought, "I wish you boys to
sleep." All fell asleep. Sedit went to Kele, woke him up, and said,--

"My sons went to hunt, but came home without deer. What shall I do
with them?"

"Let them hunt birds. Let them hunt gophers and grasshoppers in the
meadows. Gophers are as good as deer."

"All right," said Sedit; and he went home and slept.

They brought grasshoppers and gophers from the hunt next day, and
Sedit was satisfied.

"Let them live on that kind of food," thought he.

They told of their hunting that day. "We wanted water," said one of
them, "and met an old woman. 'We are dry and cannot find water,' said
we to her. 'I will give you water,' said the old woman; 'come with
me.' We followed her a while. I was afraid and said to my brothers,
'Do not drink the water she gives.' One of my brothers shouted at the
old woman and frightened her. She fell back and turned into a swamp
with a spring in the middle of it. We didn't go near the spring, but
were nearly lost in the swamp."

"That is a wicked old woman," said Sedit. "That is Tunhlucha Pokaila.
She drowns people often. I met her once and she came near drowning me.
Don't you go near her again. Hunt gophers and grasshoppers elsewhere."

"Now, my sons," said Sedit, some days later, "go and scatter around
through this country. Whenever you want to see me come here to my
sweat-house."

Sedit's sons scattered north, south, east, and west. They were at
every ridge and point, in every valley and meadow, at every spring and
river.

Kele's sons stayed at their great mountain sweat-house, doing the
same things, living in the same way. The two sisters never married,
and all Kele's people are in that mountain now. When they go out they
look like wolves; but when inside, when at home in the mountain, they
are people.




KOL TIBICHI


Kol Tibichi was born at Norpat Kodiheril on Wini Mem, just before
daylight. When a small boy, he used to go out by himself. If he went
to play with other boys sometimes, he would not stay with them. He
went out of sight, disappeared, and was lost. Then his father or
mother or others would find him in this place or that unexpectedly.
Sometimes they found him at home, sometimes at a distance, far away in
some gulch or on some mountain. It happened that his mother would look
at his bed in the night-time and see him there sleeping. She would
look again and find that he was gone. She would look a third time, and
find him just as at first. In the day he would be seen in one place
and be gone the next moment.

Once he was playing with children; they turned aside to see something,
then looked at him. He was gone. After a while they saw him in the
water under the salmon-house. Another time he disappeared.

"Where has he gone?" asked one boy.

"I cannot tell," answered another.

Soon they heard singing.

One asked, "Do you hear that?"

"Yes," said the other; "where is it?"

They listened and looked. Soon they saw Kol Tibichi sitting near the
north bank of the river, under water.

"We must run and tell his father and mother."

Two of the boys ran to tell his father and mother. "We lost your son,"
said they. "He went away from us. We looked for him a long time and
could not find him. Now we have found him; we have seen him sitting
under water; we don't know what he is doing."

His mother hurried out; ran to the river.

"We think he must be dead," said people who had gathered there. "We
think that some yapaitu [spirit] has killed him."

They soon saw that he was alive; he was moving. "Come, my son," called
his mother, stretching her hands to him,--"come, my son; come out,
come to me." But he stayed there, sitting under water.

A quarter of an hour later they saw that the boy had gone from the
river. The people heard singing in some place between them and the
village. They looked up and saw that the boy was half-way home and
going from the river.

"That is your son," called they to the woman.

"Oh, no," said the woman; but she ran up and found that it was her
son.

Another time the boy goes south with some children. These lose him,
just as the others had. In half an hour they hear singing.

"Where is he?" ask some.

"On this side," says one.

"On that," says another.

South of the river is a great sugar-pine on a steep bank. They look,
and high on a limb pointing northward they see him hanging, head
downward, singing.

They run to his mother. "We see your son hanging by his feet from a
tree."

The woman hurries to the river, runs in among the rocks and rubbish
around the tree, reaches toward the boy, throws herself on the rocks,
crying, "Oh, my child, you'll be killed!"

In a moment he is gone; there is no sign of him on the tree. Soon a
shouting is heard at the house: "My wife, come up; don't cry, our son
is here!"

She crawls out of the rocks and dirt, runs home, finds the boy safe
with his father.

The people began now to talk of the wonderful boy. Soon every one was
talking of him. There were many people in the place. Norpat Kodiheril
was a very big village.

"Some yapaitu is going to take that boy's life," said they; "some
yapaitu will kill him."

One morning the boy went down on the north side of the river with
children, but apart from them, behind, by himself. He looked up, saw a
great bird in the air flying above him. "Oh, if I had those wing
feathers!" thought the boy. Then he blew upward and wished
(olpuhlcha). That moment the great bird Komos Kulit fell down before
him. Just after the bird fell he heard a voice in the sky, a voice
high, very high up, crying,--

"Now, you little man, you must call yourself Kol Tibichi. You are to
be the greatest Hlahi [doctor] on Wini Mem."

"Look at that boy!" cried the other boys. "See! he has something."

They were afraid when they saw the great bird, and the boy stretching
the wings and handling the wonderful Komos Kulit. Some of them ran to
his mother and said to her,--

"Your son has a very big bird. It fell down from the sky to him. We
are afraid of that bird. We could not lift such a big bird."

Old people ran down; saw the boy handling Komos Kulit. "How did you
get that bird?" asked they. "Did he fall to you?"

"Yes. I saw the shadow of a big bird on the ground. I looked up. It
fell, and was here."

The old people talked,--talked much, talked a long time. There were
many of them.

"We do not know what to do; we do not know what to think. We do not
know why that bird fell," said some. "We ought not to talk about the
bird, but we ought to think about this boy, find out what he is
doing."

"Oh," said others, "he made that bird fall by blowing at it. That boy
will be a great Hlahi."

The boy killed the bird with a yapaitu dokos (spirit flint); he wanted
its wings.

The father and mother of the boy said: "Two wise men should pull out
the longest wing feathers for the boy. He wants them; he wants them to
keep."

"Let that be done," said the people; and they found two men to pull
out the two longest wing feathers. The boy went to one side while they
were pulling them, pretended not to see or care what they were doing;
but the two men knew that he knew why he did so. When the two men had
pulled out the feathers, the boy said to his father,--

"I like those feathers; save them for me; I want them."

His father took the feathers home and saved them.

Another time this boy was walking up Wini Mem--some time before he had
been at a Hlahi dance, and had seen there beautiful collars of
flicker-tail feathers, and remembered them. He walked forward and said
to himself,--

"I wonder where that man found those feathers. I would like to have
feathers like them."

"Pluck a bunch of grass with your mouth," said the yapaitu, "drop it
into your hand, and look at it."

He did so, and flicker feathers were in his hands. He counted them,
and found five hundred. "These are nice feathers; I will keep them,"
said the boy.

"Kol Tibichi is your name," said the yapaitu. "You will be the
greatest Hlahi on Wini Mem, but you must obey us. You must listen to
our words, you must do what we tell you."

Kol Tibichi took the flicker feathers and walked westward, walked
across a wide gulch till he came to a black-oak tree above Norpat
Kodiheril.

"I like that oak-tree," said Kol Tibichi. "I think that is a good
place for my mother to get acorns." He blew then, and said: "You must
be very big, wide, and high, give many acorns every fall. I will call
your place Olpuhlchiton" (blowing upward place, _i. e._ wishing
place).

He went home then, and gave the flicker-tail feathers to his mother.
"Now, my mother," said he, "I wish you to keep these feathers for me."

"Where did you find them, my son?" asked she. "You are always doing
something. You did not find these yourself; the yapaitu got them. I
will keep them. I am sorry for you, but I cannot stop what you are
doing. You cannot stop it yourself. But I will keep these feathers for
you; I will keep them safely."

All the people talked much of Kol Tibichi now.

Once there was a doctor's dance, and the boy remained at home till one
night when the yapaitu came to him and he began to hlaha. His father
and mother did not know what the trouble was.

"Bring him here," said the oldest doctor.

"He is a Hlahi," said the doctors, when they saw him. "Sak hikai [the
rainbow] is his yapaitu. You must give him to us till the yapaitu
leaves him. While the yapaitu is with him, let him stay inside."

They were five or six days making Hlahis (doctors). The boy stayed in
the sweat-house six days, never eating, never drinking; some others
ate and drank, but Kol Tibichi neither ate nor drank.

"Something must be done to make that yapaitu leave him. You must put a
band around Kol Tibichi's head," said the chief, "and the yapaitu will
leave him."

They got a white wolf-tail headband. The yapaitu did not go. "This is
not the right kind of a headband," said the doctor, after a while.
They tried fox, wildcat, coyote, a white-deer band, without effect.

"We don't know what he wants," said some Hlahis.

Next they tried otter, fisher, coon, badger, black bear, grizzly bear,
silver-gray fox, mink, beaver, rabbit, red-headed woodpecker.

"What does he want?" asked some.

"Now," said the old doctor, "you ought to know that this boy should
have food and drink, and he cannot have them till the yapaitu goes.
You should know that the headband that his yapaitu wants is a tsahai
loiyas" (woman's front apron made of maple bark, painted red).

They brought this apron, made the headband, and tied it on his head.

"This is the one," said the yapaitu.

Kol Tibichi began to sing; the Hlahi danced a few minutes. The boy
blew then, and the yapaitu left him. Kol Tibichi ate venison first and
drank water, then took other kinds of food. From that time on Kol
Tibichi was a Hlahi.

Soon after the great Hlahi dance, perhaps two weeks, Notisa, chief of
Norpat Kodiheril, fell sick; he began to have a bad feeling at midday,
and in the evening all his friends thought he would die. In the early
night people in Norpat Kodi saw a light going to Kol Tibichi's house.

"People are coming; there must be some one sick in the village," said
the boy's father and mother. "People are coming. See, there is a big
light moving this way."

Two men came to the door. "Come in," said Kol Tibichi's father. "We
thought some one was sick when we saw your light coming."

"We are here because Notisa is sick," said the men. "He got sick at
noon."

The two men spread out a marten skin and said: "We brought this to
show it to you and your son. We have heard that he is a powerful
Hlahi. The chief gave us this skin to show you. We are afraid that
Notisa will die. We want your son to go with us to see him."

They gave the skin to Kol Tibichi. It was the best skin in the chief's
house.

"We will go," said Kol Tibichi's father. "I do not say that my son is
a Hlahi, but he can do something."

They waked the boy, made him ready to go. "Come," said his mother; and
she carried him to the chief's house.

"My mother, put me down," said Kol Tibichi, when they had come near
the house.

"I do not like to put you down," said the mother.

"Put me down, put me down a moment," said the boy.

His mother put him down. Then he saw some one looking around Notisa's
house, pushing about, looking, watching in the dark, lurking around,
holding arrows. This was a yapaitu, ready to shoot Notisa and kill
him.

Kol Tibichi called his own yapaitu, who went to the one who was
watching and said: "What are you doing here? What do you want at this
house?"

"I am doing nothing," answered the yapaitu.

"You are waiting to do something. You want to do harm."

"Oh, no; I am only looking around here, just trying to find the door.
I wanted to see some one."

"You are ready to shoot a yapaitu dokos. You want to kill Notisa. You
are watching around here to kill him."

"Oh, no, I am not. I am just looking around, not doing anything."

"You are ready to kill Notisa, the chief. You are waiting to kill
him," said Kol Tibichi's yapaitu, who just took hold of the strange
yapaitu, twisted him, killed him right there, and buried him.

Kol Tibichi's mother took her son into the chief's house. The boy knew
what had been done. His yapaitu told him what he had done, and came in
with him. The boy sat down near Notisa.

People thought the chief ready to die, thought that he might die any
moment. "Let the boy put his hand on the sick man," said they.

"Put your hand on the chief," said the father. "You must do what you
can. You must try, do your best to cure him."

Kol Tibichi spat on his hands, passed them over Notisa's breast and
face. "I am sleepy, my mother, oh, I am so sleepy," said the boy, when
he had passed his hands over the chief.

"He cannot do more to-night," said the father. "We will go home."

Next morning people in the sweat-house heard a man talking outside. He
came in and said, "I am well!" This was Notisa.

"We are glad," said the people. "Kol Tibichi has saved you."

The boy grew up and became a great Hlahi. When twenty years old, he
was the greatest Hlahi on Wini Mem.

One year there was a Hlahi dance in El Hakam. Kol Tibichi was a man.
He was thirty years old then. He went to the dance. Tulitot was the
great Hlahi in that place, and he thought himself better than Kol
Tibichi. While dancing, Tulitot took a snake from his mouth, a large
rattlesnake, and held it in both hands as he danced. The snake was his
own child. Kol Tibichi looked, and thought he could do better; and,
dancing forward, he blew, as Hlahis do, and threw out long burning
flames on both sides of his mouth. All present were afraid, and with
Tulitot ran back before him in fear.

When the dance was over, Kol Tibichi went to Norpat Kodi and lived on,
a great Hlahi: lived till he was a hundred years of age and more. He
could not walk any longer. He knew that he could not live. "I cannot
live any more," said he. "My yapaitu tells me this,--I cannot walk. I
cannot do anything. My yapaitu tells me that I must leave Norpat
Kodiheril. [He was not sick, but decrepit.] My yapaitu is going to
take me and leave my bones in this place with you. When I go from my
body, do not bury it. Leave it on the ground out there. Let it lie one
night. Next morning you will see a large rock in place of it. When
people are sick, let them come and take a piece of the rock, or some
earth, or some moss from it; that will cure them."

"We will not do that," said Notisa, a son of the first chief; "we bury
every body, and we will bury yours like all others."

"Do not bury my bones," said Kol Tibichi.

"We should not like to see your bones all the time. We have no wish to
see a rock in place of them."

"Well, take my body to the black-oak tree, put it eight or ten feet
from the ground, leave it there one night; next morning you will see
water in a hollow of the oak. Any man may come and get that water, rub
it on his body, and drink some. It will cure him."

"No," said the chief, "we don't want to see the tree there every day.
We do not wish to look at it all the time."

"Dig a deep grave, then," said Kol Tibichi; "put my body in with
nothing around it. When you come to mourn, do not stand east of the
grave-mound. On the morning after my burial you will see a rainbow
coming out of the grave."

Kol Tibichi died. They did everything just as he told them. All saw
the rainbow and said, "We ought to have left his body above ground,
and to have done all that he asked of us at first. The yapaitu is
mourning for him."

The rainbow stood there two days and two nights at the grave, then
moved two feet eastward. Next morning it was four feet away, then
eight, going farther day by day till it was at the salmon-house where
Kol Tibichi used to go when a boy. It stood there by the salmon-house
five days. Next it was on the north bank of the river, then on the
hillside beyond, then on the hilltop, then on the mountain-slope, then
on the mountain-top. Next all the people in Norpat Kodiheril heard a
noise and knocking in the grave-mound one night, and early next
morning they saw an immense bird rising out of Kol Tibichi's grave.
First the head came, and then the body. At sunrise it came out
altogether, and flew to the sugar-pine from which Kol Tibichi had hung
head downward in childhood. It perched on the tree, stayed five
minutes, and then flew away, flew to the mountain, to the rainbow,
went into the rainbow. The bird and rainbow went away, disappeared
together. The bird was Komus Kulit. The rainbow was Kol Tibichi's
yapaitu.




THE WINNING OF HALAI AUNA AT THE HOUSE OF TUINA


This myth and all that follow it belong to the Yanas, a nation of
Indians described in the notes. The nine preceding myths are of the
Wintus, neighbors of the Yanas.

The languages of these two nations are radically different.


PERSONAGES

After each name is given that of the creature or thing into which the
personage was changed subsequently.

=Chuhna=, spider; =Halai Auna=, morning star; =Igupa Topa=, ----;
=Ochúl Márimi=, mountain lion; =Pul Miauna=, colored bow, the rainbow;
=Pun Miaupa=, son of rainbow; =Tuina=, the sun; =Utjamhji=, mock sun;
=Wakara=, the moon; =Wediko=, meteor; =Marimi= means woman.

       *       *       *       *       *

Old Pul Miauna had a son, Pun Miaupa, a wife, and two daughters.

Pun Miaupa had a quarrel with his father and made up his mind to leave
him. "I am going away," said he to his father and mother one day. "I
am tired of living here."

The mother began to cry.

"Which way are you going?" asked the father.

Pun Miaupa gave no answer; wouldn't tell his father where he was
going. The father stood up and walked out of the house. The mother
stopped crying and said,--

"I want you to go straight to my brother, your uncle Igupa Topa. Tell
him where you are going. Do not go without seeing him."

Pun Miaupa left his mother, went to his uncle's, stood on the roof of
the sweat-house. The old man was very busy throwing out grass that
day. A great many people had gambled at his house a day earlier; they
had left much grass in it.

"Uncle, are you alive?" asked Pun Miaupa.

The old uncle looked up and saw his nephew, who said,--

"Uncle, I am full grown. I am going on a very long journey, I am going
far away. My mother told me to come here and see you."

"Where are you going, my nephew?"

"To the north."

"I thought so," said the old man, who knew that his nephew would go to
get Wakara's youngest daughter.

Wakara took all his daughter's suitors to Tuina's sweat-house, and
they were killed there. Igupa Topa knew this and said, "Wait a little,
nephew, I will go with you."

"Uncle," said Pun Miaupa, "you are too old. I don't want you to go;
the journey would kill you. I want to travel very fast on this
journey."

"I will go at my own pace, I will go as I like," said the uncle.

"Well, come with me if you can go fast."

Igupa Topa dressed, took a staff, and looked very old. "Go on, I am
ready," said he.

Pun Miaupa started. He turned around to look at his uncle, and saw the
old man; saw him fall while coming out of the sweat-house. Pun Miaupa
stopped, held down his head, and thought, "He will not go, even as far
as Wajami."

The uncle rose and followed on.

"You are too old, uncle; you cannot walk well. Stay at home; that is
better for you."

"Go ahead," said the old man; "walk fast. I will come as I can."

Pun Miaupa went on; his uncle followed. Igupa Topa stumbled every few
steps, fell, hurt himself, tore his skin. Pun Miaupa looked back very
often. The uncle was always tumbling. "He must be bruised and broken
from these falls," thought the nephew.

Pun Miaupa was on a hill beyond Chichipana. He sat down and smoked.
His uncle came up while he was sitting there.

"Let me smoke; then I want to see you jump to that mountain over
there," said the old man, pointing to it.

"I shall leave you behind if I do that."

"Leave me to myself," said the old man.

Pun Miaupa put on deerskin leggings and a beaded shirt,--a splendid
dress. He went then with one spring to the top of the opposite
mountain and looked back to see his uncle; but old Igupa Topa had
jumped too. He was just passing Pun Miaupa and went far beyond him.

"I thought you were too old to jump," said Pun Miaupa, coming up to
him.

They jumped again, jumped to a second mountain, and the uncle was
ahead the second time. After that they walked on. The old man fell
very often, but Pun Miaupa did not pity him any longer; he laughed
when his uncle fell. They travelled a good while, travelled fast, and
when both reached Wajami Mountain, they sat down to rest there.

"I want Wakara to send out his youngest daughter for wood," said Pun
Miaupa in his mind; and the next minute Wakara, who was far away in
his own sweat-house, told his youngest daughter to take a basket and
go for wood. This daughter was Halai Auna.

At that moment, too, Wakara's wife, Ochul Marimi, said to the girl:
"Why do you lie asleep all the time and not help me? I want you to get
me leaves for acorn bread."

Halai Auna took the basket and went upon the mountain side to find
wood and leaves. Pun Miaupa saw the girl filling her basket.

"That is Wakara's daughter," said he to his uncle.

"Stop! Be careful!" said Igupa Topa.

The uncle put himself into his nephew's heart now to strengthen him.
There was only one person to be seen. Igupa Topa went into his nephew,
went in because he knew that Tuina killed all men who tried to get
Halai Auna, and he wished to save his sister's son, Pun Miaupa.

When the girl had her basket full and turned to place it on her back,
she saw Pun Miaupa behind her; she could not move, she was so
frightened.

"Why are you afraid? Am I so ugly?" asked Pun Miaupa.

He pleased her; but she said not a word, just ran, hurried home with
the basket, and threw it down at the door.

"What is your trouble?" asked the mother. "You don't like to work, I
think."

"What is the matter?" asked Wakara. "You are frightened."

"I saw a man on the mountain, a man with woodpecker scalps on his
head."

"The southern people wear woodpecker scalps," said Wakara; "that must
be one of the southern people."

Pun Miaupa sprang through the air, came down in front of Wakara's
sweat-house, went in and sat near Halai Auna on a bearskin. Nice food
was brought for all, and when they had finished eating, Wakara said,--

"Now, my daughters, and you, my wife, Ochul Marimi, make ready; let us
go. I wish to see my brother, Tuina, and hear what he says of Halai
Auna's new husband."

They dressed, put on beads, and put red paint on their faces. Halai
Auna said nothing. She sat with her head down; she was sorry; she
liked Pun Miaupa, she felt sure that they would kill him.

When all were ready, Wakara took his wife's hand and danced around the
fire with her. He had two unmarried daughters besides Halai Auna; one
of these took her father's hand, the other took Halai Auna's, and all
danced around the fire and circled about Pun Miaupa. They put him in
the middle and danced in a circle; they began to sing, and rose in
the air then and danced right up out of the sweat-house, went through
the smoke-hole and moved westward, singing as they went,--

    "I-nó, i-nó, i-nó, no-má
    I-nó, i-nó, i-nó, no-má."

They moved faster as they went, and danced all the time. It was dark
when they danced up through the roof of the sweat-house; no one saw
them, though there were many people round about. Old Wakara's
sons-in-law lived in that place; all the stars were his daughters, and
his daughters were married, except Halai Auna and the two who danced
around the fire. Wakara went without being seen. He would let no one
have Halai Auna unless one whom Tuina could not kill.

Now, a little before daylight they reached Tuina's house. Wakara stood
on the roof of the sweat-house and called, "My brother, I want you to
spring out of bed."

Tuina was asleep in the sweat-house. He had three daughters and no
son. The daughters were called Wediko, and his wife was Utjamhji.
Wakara went down into the sweat-house and sat at the side of Tuina.
Tuina took a bearskin and put it down at his other hand, and told
Halai Auna and her husband to sit on it. Tuina took up a big sack of
tobacco and a large pipe cut out of maple wood. The tobacco was made
of his own hair, rolled and cut fine. He put this in the pipe and gave
it to Pun Miaupa. Wakara and Tuina watched now, and looked at him. The
young man smoked all the tobacco and gave back the pipe.

Tuina filled the pipe now with a different, a stronger tobacco. He
used to rub his skin often, and what he rubbed off he dried and made
fine. This was his tobacco of the second kind. He had a sackful of
this stored away, and he filled his pipe now with it.

Pun Miaupa smoked, seemed to swallow the smoke. It was not he who was
smoking, though, but the uncle in his heart. He emptied the pipe and
returned it. Tuina took now tobacco of a third kind,--his own flesh
dried and rubbed fine. He filled the pipe, gave it to Pun Miaupa, and
waited to see him fall dead at the second if not at the first whiff.

The country outside the sweat-house was full of dead people, all
killed by Tuina's tobacco. Some of the bodies were fresh, others
decayed; some were sound skeletons, others a few old bones.

Pun Miaupa smoked out this pipe, gave it back empty. Tuina handed him
a fourth pipe. The tobacco was made of his own brains, dried and
rubbed fine. Pun Miaupa smoked this and gave the empty pipe back to
Tuina.

Tuina now tried the fifth pipe. He filled it with marrow from his own
bones, gave it to Halai Auna's husband. Wakara and Tuina watched now,
waiting to see him fall. Pun Miaupa swallowed all and gave the pipe
back.

Tuina had no other kind of tobacco and could do no more. He dropped
his head. "I don't know what kind of person this is," thought he. All
at once he remembered old Igupa Topa, and thought: "This may be a
young one of that kind. I can do nothing with him, he has beaten me."

Halai Auna was very glad to have such a husband. This was the first
man of all who had come to see her who had not been killed by Tuina.
She laughed all this time in her mind.

Pun Miaupa went out, killed five deer, and brought them in. The women
cooked a great deal that day. Wakara and Tuina sat in the house,
talked and ate Pun Miaupa's fresh venison. The next night all slept.
Igupa Topa went out of Pun Miaupa's heart, went about midnight, and
sat north of the pillar in the side of the house, sat without saying a
word. He had a white feather in his head, and looked very angry and
greatly dissatisfied.

Early next morning Tuina and Wakara were up and saw the old man
sitting there with that big feather in his head, and they looked at
him.

"Oh," said Tuina, "I know now why Halai Auna's husband can smoke my
tobacco. I know that old Igupa Topa this long time. I know what that
old fellow can do."

They put plenty of food before Igupa Topa, but he would eat none of
it. Pun Miaupa killed five deer that morning and brought them in. The
two old men were glad to see such nice venison, and see so much of it.
Igupa Topa sat by himself, and ate nothing.

"Uncle, why do you not eat?" asked Pun Miaupa.

He made no answer, but watched till all were asleep; then he stood up
and ate, ate the whole night through, ate all the acorn bread, all the
roots, ate all that there was in the house, except venison. That was
not his kind of food; he would not touch it. He sat down on the north
side of the central pillar when he had finished eating.

"You must work hard to cook food enough," said Tuina next morning to
the women. "Some one in this house must be very hungry."

The women worked hard all that day; in the evening the house was full
of good food again. Pun Miaupa's uncle would not eat a morsel placed
before him, but when night came he ate everything there was except
venison.

"There must be some one in this house who is very hungry," said Tuina,
when he rose the next morning. "Make ready more food to-day, work
hard, my daughters."

"We will not work to-day; that nasty old fellow eats everything in the
night time. We will not carry wood and water all day and have nothing
to eat the next morning."

"I don't like him, either," said Tuina; "he will go very soon, I
hope."

Igupa Topa heard these words and remembered them. Tuina's wife and
Wakara's wife, both old women, had to work that day without
assistance. In the middle of the forenoon a great cloud rose in the
south. Pun Miaupa's uncle raised it. "Let rain come, thick heavy
rain," said he in his mind. "I want darkness, I want a big storm and
cold rain."

The cloud was black; it covered all the sky; every one came in, and
soon the rain began. It rained in streams, in rivers; it filled the
valleys, filled all places. The water reached Tuina's sweat-house,
rushed in, and filled the whole place; all had to stand in water; and
the rain was very cold.

Old Tuina and Wakara were shivering; their teeth knocked together;
their wives and daughters were crying. Igupa Topa had taken his nephew
and Halai Auna up to his place on the north side, near the roof of his
sweat-house, where they were dry.

The sweat-house was nearly full of water. All were crying now. Some
time before daylight one of Tuina's daughters was drowned, and then
the other two, and Wakara's two daughters. About dawn Tuina and Wakara
with their two wives were drowned. All were dead in the sweat-house
except Igupa Topa, his nephew, and Halai Auna. At daylight the rain
stopped, the water began to go down, and all the bodies floated out
through the doorway. The place was dry. Pun Miaupa made a fire. Halai
Auna came to the fire and began to cry for her father, her mother and
sisters.

"You must not cry," said Pun Miaupa; "my uncle did this. He will bring
all to life again quickly."

But Halai Auna was afraid, and she cried for some time.

Just after midday Igupa Topa went outside, saw the dead bodies, and
said: "Why sleep all day? It is time to be up, you two old men and
you five young girls!"

Tuina and Wakara sprang up, went to the creek, and swam. "No one but
Igupa Topa could have done this to us," said they.

All the women rose up as if they had been only sleeping.

"My brother, I shall go home to-morrow," said Wakara. "It is time for
me."

Very early next morning Wakara and his wife began to dance, then the
two daughters, then Halai Auna and her husband. They danced out by the
smoke-hole, rose through the air, sang, and danced themselves home.

Wakara had been five days away, and all his daughters' husbands were
saying: "Where is our father-in-law? He may have been killed." All
were very glad when they saw old Wakara in the sweat-house next
morning.

Before leaving Tuina's sweat-house Igupa Topa had gone into his
nephew's heart again. When Wakara came home, he took his new
son-in-law to try a sport which he had. The old man had made a great
pole out of deer sinews. This pole was fixed in the ground and was
taller than the highest tree. Wakara played in this way: A man climbed
the pole, a second bent it down and brought the top as near the foot
as possible. He let the top go then, and it shot into the air. If the
man on the pole held firmly, he was safe; if he lost his grip he was
hurled up high, then fell and was killed.

"Come, my son-in-law," said Wakara one day, "I will show you the
place where I play sometimes pleasantly."

They went to the place. The old man climbed first, grasped the pole
near the top. Pun Miaupa pulled it down; his uncle was in his heart,
and he was very strong. He brought the top toward the ground, did not
draw very hard, and let the pole fly back, again. It sprang into the
air. Wakara was not hurled away; he held firmly. Pun Miaupa brought
down the pole a second time, he brought it down rather softly, and let
it go. Wakara held his place yet. He tried a third time. Wakara was
unshaken.

"That will do for me," said Wakara. "Go up now; it is your time."

Pun Miaupa went on the pole and held with his uncle's power. It was
not he who held the pole, but Igupa Topa. "I will end you this time,"
thought Wakara. He bent the pole close to the ground and let go.
Wakara looked sharply to see his son-in-law shoot through the
air,--looked a good while, did not see him. "My son-in-law has gone
very high," thought he. He looked a while yet in the sky; at last he
looked at the pole, and there was his son-in-law.

He bent the pole a second time, bent it lower than before; then let it
fly. This time Wakara looked at the pole, and Pun Miaupa was on the
top of it.

Wakara was angry. He bent the pole to the ground, bent angrily, and
let it go. "He will fly away this time, surely," thought he, and
looked to the sky to see Pun Miaupa, did not see him; looked at the
pole, he was on it. "What kind of person is my son-in-law?" thought
Wakara.

It was Wakara's turn now to go on the pole, and he climbed it. Pun
Miaupa gave his father-in-law a harder pull this time, but he held his
place. The second time Pun Miaupa spoke to Wakara in his own mind:
"You don't like me, I don't like you; you want to kill me. I will send
you high now."

He bent the pole, brought the top almost to the foot of it, and let it
fly. He looked to the top, Wakara was gone. He had been hurled up to
the sky, and he stayed there.

Pun Miaupa laughed. "Now, my father-in-law," said he, "you will never
come down here to live again; you will stay where you are now forever,
you will become small and die, then you will come to life and grow
large. You will be that way always, growing old and becoming young
again."

Pun Miaupa went home alone.

Wakara's daughters waited for their father, and when he didn't come
back they began to cry. At last, when it was dark and they saw their
father far up in the sky, they cried very bitterly.

Next morning Pun Miaupa took Halai Auna, his wife, and his uncle, and
went to his father's house.

Chuhna, the greatest spinner in the world, lived among Wakara's
daughters. All day those women cried and lamented.

"What shall we do?" said they; "we want to go and live near our
father. Who can take us up to him?"

"I will take you up to him," said Chuhna, the spinner, who had a great
rope fastened to the sky.

Chuhna made an immense basket, put in all the daughters with their
husbands, and drew them up till they reached the sky; and Wakara's
daughters, the stars, are there on the sky yet.




THE HAKAS AND THE TENNAS


PERSONAGES

After each name is given that of the creature or thing into which the
personage was changed subsequently.

=Darí Jowá=, eagle; =Haka=, flint; =Hakayámchiwi=, the whole Haka
people; =Ilhataina=, lightning; =Tenna=, grizzly bear; =Tsawandi
Kamshu=, red flint clover; =Tsawandi Kamshupa=, young red flint
clover; =Tsuwalkai=, a reddish flint. =Marimi= means woman.

       *       *       *       *       *

At first about two hundred people lived with the old woman, Tsuwalkai
Marimi, in one great house; they were all descended from her. They
were the Hakayamchiwi,--all the Haka people.

Now, there was a deadly quarrel between the Hakas and the Tennas, who
lived near them, and it began in this way: The Tennas invited the
Hakas to a hunt in the mountains; ten of each people were to make a
party of twenty. One Tenna went early the first morning to make a fire
at some distance from the sweat-house, at a meeting-place for the
hunters of both sides. Ten Hakas went out early, were first at the
fire; but the Tennas came, and then the twenty stood around to warm
themselves,--the Tennas on the north and the Hakas on the south side
of the fire.

The Hakas had flint arrow-heads, good ones; the Tennas had arrow-heads
of pine bark. While they were warming themselves, a Tenna said to a
Haka, "Let me see your arrow-point."

"Here it is," said the Haka; "look at it."

"He, he, he!" laughed the Tenna; "that point is no good!" He held it
out, looked at it, and laughed again. "If I put it down my throat, it
won't hurt me."

"Let me see your arrow-point," said the Haka.

"Here it is," said the Tenna.

The Haka looked at the pointed pine bark, laughed, and said: "That is
no arrow-head; that is nothing but pine bark. If I stab myself behind
with your arrow-head, it won't hurt me. I shall not die."

"Let me see you stab yourself," said the Tenna.

"Look at me. I'll stab myself behind with it."

The Haka stabbed himself, and the Tenna's arrow-head broke; it did not
hurt him a bit. "You see," said he, "I am not dying."

"Let me see your arrow-head," said the Tenna.

He gave the arrow-point, and the Tenna stabbed himself in the same way
that the Haka had. The arrow-head was very sharp and went into him,
cut him,--cut his intestines. He fell over and lay on the ground, lay
there groaning.

"You see that my arrow-head is good; it will kill any one," said the
Haka.

Right away the Tenna was dying; very soon he was dead. When the Tennas
saw that their brother was dead, they rushed at the ten Hakas and
killed them hand to hand before they could use arrows, before they
could save themselves.

The Tennas went home, but the Hakas did not go home that evening.

Next morning early one of the Tennas came to the house of the Hakas,
and called out,--

"Come to the fire, cousins; come to the fire. We will meet you there.
Oh, cousins, it is time to go hunting; be up. Your brothers who went
yesterday are going again to-day."

"We will go," said the Hakas, who did not know that their brothers
were killed.

The Tennas had a fire in the same place as the first day, and were
there waiting. After a time the ten Hakas came and stood at the fire
in the same way as their brothers had stood a day earlier. They did
not quarrel now, but went to the woods soon. The Tennas had everything
ready for hunting; other Tennas were hidden in the woods, and ten more
Hakas were killed by them that day.

On the third morning a Tenna came to the Hakas and called,--

"Cousins, it is time to be up, time to hunt. Your brothers of
yesterday and the day before are all waiting."

"We will go, we will go," said the Hakas.

The fire was ready; the Tennas were there. They came earlier, and
acted just as they had acted the second day. Ten more Hakas were
killed by them that day.

The Hakas would not go on the fourth day. The Tennas began now to kill
Hakas whenever they found them out hunting, or fishing, whenever they
saw them in the woods anywhere. When the Haka women went to dig
roots, or find worms, or gather acorns, the Tennas killed them
wherever they caught them. When the children went out to play or went
to get water, they killed them. The Tennas killed on till only one old
woman, Tsuwalkai Marimi, and her grandson, Tsawandi Kamshu, were left
of all the Hakas.

One evening Tsawandi Kamshu hung his bow (an old bow bound around
closely with deer sinew) over his bed on the south side of the
sweat-house. With this bow he hung an otter-skin quiver full of
arrows.

"My grandmother," said he in the night, "I may not come back
to-morrow. If anything happens, the bow and the quiver and all that
are with them will fall on the bed. You will know then that some one
has killed me. But a child will rise from the spittle which I have
left near the head of the bed; a little boy will come up from the
ground."

Tsuwalkai Marimi listened, said nothing, made no answer. Tsawandi
Kamshu went out the next morning at daybreak, stayed out all that day.
At dusk the bow fell with the quiver.

The old woman began to cry. She cried bitterly. "All our people are
dead," said she. "All our people are gone, and I am alone."

She went around crying; went along the four sides of the house; went
to where the bows, arrows, and otter-skin quivers were hanging; cried
all that night, cried all the next day.

The Tennas watched for the old woman, watched closely. They wanted to
kill her, but they could not break, into the house, and she would not
go out to them. They wanted to kill her and put an end to the last of
the Hakas.

While Tsuwalkai was crying the second night, the Tennas were near the
house listening and watching.

"The old woman is laughing," said they. "She is having some feast;
that is why she is laughing. She must be glad, that old woman."

Tsuwalkai heard these words of her enemies. "Oh, Tennas, do not talk
that way," said she. "Something may happen yet that will hurt you.
Some one may come who will make your hearts sore. You may drop tears
yet, you may be sorry."

The old woman cried the third night and third day. The fourth night
she dropped no tears, but she could not sleep. In the middle of the
fourth night she heard crying on the ground near Tsawandi Kamshu's
sleeping-place. A little baby was crying, rolling, struggling,
wailing. The old woman listened, she heard "U ná, u ná." She was
frightened at first.

"I must be dreaming of a baby, I must be dreaming," said she. "Oh, my
people are making me dream. I hear a noise like the crying of a baby
in my sweat-house. Oh, it is no baby; I am only dreaming."

The baby cried on, kept crying. The old woman went to the spot where
the crying was, looked, found a baby covered with dirt, mud, and
ashes. She had not carried the ashes out since her grandson had gone;
she could not carry them. The Tennas were watching outside for her,
watching to kill the old woman. The baby rolled around in the dirt
and the ashes.

"I don't think any one brought that baby into this house," said the
old woman to herself. "Tsawandi Kamshu said that a baby would come
from the ground, would rise from his spittle. Maybe this is his spirit
that has come back and is a baby again. I will call this baby Tsawandi
Kamshupa."

She took up the baby, a little boy, washed him, washed him all night,
the little child was so dirty. She washed him in cold water, and he
grew while she washed. She washed him till morning, but gave him no
food.

The Tennas heard now the noise of two people inside. Tsuwalkai Marimi
felt glad, she had the company of this little boy. All day and two
nights she washed the child. He ate nothing.

"I want you to live and grow large, little boy," said the old woman.
"I want you to grow quickly; you will be a great help to me."

The little boy did not know what was said yet. She washed the child,
talked three days and three nights to him. The little boy could creep
around the house now, could creep through every part of it. She washed
him in the night, in the day; washed him often. He grew very fast. In
ten days he was a man full grown. He could talk now as well as any
one, and one day he asked the old woman,--

"What house is this? What people live here?"

She told him the whole story of her people; told how all had been
killed by the Tennas in the woods, in the fields, on the water.

"I am sorry to hear what you tell," said he.

He asked now for a bow. She gave him a fresh one. He broke it.

"I want one to kill birds outside with it."

"You must not go out," said the old woman; "bad people are near us."

"I only want to kill birds. Whose arms are these?" asked he, pointing
to knives, bows, and arrows on the walls.

"Oh, it makes me sorry to tell you, it makes me sorry to talk of them.
These are the arms of many men. The Tennas killed all of them."

She went to the west side of the house and gave him bows. He broke one
after another. He broke every bow on the walls except one. When he
came to his own bow, his old bow, he laughed. He took it himself
without asking. He tried and could not break it; tried again, laughed,
and was glad.

"Tsuwalkai, whose bow is this?" asked he.

"That was the bow of a good man."

"He was a good man, I think," said Tsawandi Kamshupa; "why did he die?
There was a good man in this house; he had that bow; he was a great
fighter."

Tsawandi Kamshupa tried again to break the bow with his feet and
hands, but he could not.

"There was a good man in this house," said the old woman, "the best
man of all the Haka people. That was his bow."

"I wished to go hunting to-day, but I will go very early to-morrow. I
will go before daylight," said Tsawandi Kamshupa. "I am going to look
around. I am going a short distance to hunt. I will come back; have no
fear."

The old woman was afraid. She had lost the owner of the bow, the best
of her grandsons.

"I will only go down south a little way," said he.

Early next morning he took a deerskin, wrapped it around his body,
tied a belt around his waist, and took his arrows. There was dew on
the grass yet. He looked down the mountain-side, saw many people near
a big fire, and said,--

"I know who those people are; they are Teptewi" (Tenna women).

There were fifty of them. They had come to that swampy mountain-side
early in the morning. They had come before daybreak to dig worms and
gather clover. Each had a stick to dig worms with.

The young man stood watching these women, and said to himself: "What
shall I do? These Tennas have killed all my people except my old
grandmother. They tried to kill her. They will kill her and me if they
can. What shall I do? There are a great many women there. I will kill
a lone one to begin with, then hide my bow and quiver and go to those
farther down."

He went along the slope somewhat, came to one Tenna woman, and killed
her. The others did not see him, did not know that he was on the
mountain, thought that all the Hakas were dead.

He opened the Tenna's throat, took her heart, put it inside his
blanket, and left the body dead on the ground. The other Tenna women
were working not far from a fire. These women had taken their teeth
out and hung them on a tree near the fire. Whenever they were angry
the women put these teeth in their mouths to bite with.

Tsawandi went along the mountain-side carefully. "I will go to that
fire," thought he. Then he sprang up and stood near the fire, warmed
his hands. The women did not see him yet. One looked up at the fire,
but saw no one. "Hei!" cried he, "you women are out very early. Come
here and warm yourselves. Cook worms for me; I am hungry, I want
worms."

The women gave no answer, said nothing. They were afraid; they could
not bite, for their teeth were out. "If I had my teeth, I would kill
that man," thought each woman.

Tsawandi kept his eye on the teeth, which were at one end of the fire;
he would let no woman come near them. "Come up! come up!" called he.
At last they came up and sat near the fire, but could not get their
teeth. "I did not know that women go out in the morning so early,"
said he. "I saw a deer some distance back here and killed it. I was in
a great hurry. I took only a small piece of meat."

He took out the heart, cut it into pieces, roasted them by the fire;
then he gave some to each woman. The women were hungry, and were glad
to get meat.

"Have you no bread?" asked Tsawandi.

"We have no bread," said the women.

"Well, I have acorn bread." He had no bread, but he put his hand in
his bosom and thought, "I want bread of red flint meal." This bread
came to his bosom, and he gave each woman a piece of it. "My
grandmother makes good bread," said he. "I carry it with me always to
show people and let them have some to eat. Every one likes my
grandmother's bread."

The bread tasted well; all ate. He watched their teeth closely. Very
soon a woman fell dead; then all fell quickly and died. He cut their
hearts out--fifty hearts--and carried them under his deerskin. He went
farther south now; ran quickly. He saw fifty more women working near a
fire; went near the fire, sprang up to it, and cried,--

"Hu, hu! women, you are out early; why so early? It is cold; come warm
your hands. Give me something to eat; give me worms and clover; give
me something to eat, and I will give you something; I will give bread,
I will give venison."

These women had come out to dig roots; their teeth were hanging on a
tree near the fire. The Tenna women never kept their teeth in their
mouths while they were working. "I wish my teeth were in my mouth,"
thought each woman, "I would kill that man."

All these fifty women came up to the fire, ate acorn bread as the
others had eaten, and died.

From this fire Tsawandi Kamshupa went to another, and that morning he
killed all the Tenna women who were out; not one was left alive,
except a few who had remained at home in the sweat-house. He went
farther south now; went to their sweat-house. It was still early
morning. All the Tenna men were at home. "How shall I kill them?"
thought Tsawandi. "I will go into the house and say that I am sent by
my brother to invite them to a feast and a hunt. They'll believe
that."

He looked down from the top of the house. There were many Tennas
there. All the Tenna men were in the sweat-house. Tsawandi Kamshupa
went in boldly; sat near the fire, warming his hands. The Tennas
whispered to each other, "That's my blood, sister; that's my blood,
brother!" meaning, "he's my share; I'll eat him."

"Oh, you Tenna people, what are you talking of? I am your neighbor. I
do not live very far from you, I am no stranger. I have come down here
early this morning to invite you to a feast, to a hunt. Tsawandi
Kamshu sent me down here to ask you; he would like to see you at his
sweat-house."

"This one here looks like Tsawandi Kamshu himself," whispered some.

"Oh, no," whispered others. "Tsawandi Kamshu is dead this good while.
We killed him."

"What are you telling each other?" interrupted Tsawandi Kamshupa. "I
am not Tsawandi Kamshu. He does not look like me. He is my brother. He
sent me to ask you to hunt. I killed some deer on the way here, but
could bring only their hearts. Here are the hearts."

He cut the hearts into pieces, gave them all to the Tennas. They
roasted the hearts and ate them. He gave flint bread to them, as he
had to the women on the mountain slope. All ate the bread, praised
it, asked for more, ate it very eagerly. They began soon to fall on
every side. Four Tennas only would not eat the flint bread. They
closed the ground door, fastened it outside, went to the top of the
sweat-house, and watched. Soon every Tenna in the sweat-house was
dead.

Tsawandi Kamshupa looked up and saw the four Tennas there looking down
at him. Their four heads were close together, and they looked very
angry.

"Why are you four looking down here so? What are you watching for,
what are you trying to do up there? The people down here have all gone
to sleep, and can't talk with me. I want you men to talk a while. Come
down, you, and talk with me; then I'll go home."

The four Tennas said nothing.

"You want to catch me; I know that. I will show you how I can jump."

They said nothing, watched sharply, sitting opposite each other with
their long teeth sticking out. When he saw that they would not leave
the opening, he said again, "I will show you how I can jump."

He bent to one side a little, shot up like an arrow, darted out
between the four. The next thing the Tennas saw was Tsawandi Kamshupa
in the field beyond the house.

When he had passed through the opening, the Tennas closed their jaws
with a snap, and almost bit each other's noses off. Their bite was too
late.

Tsawandi Kamshupa now sent three arrows from his old bow. They went
through the hearts of three Tennas; they dropped dead where they
stood. The fourth ran away, ran with all his strength, was never seen
in that place again. He ran northwest, and from that Tenna come all
that are in the world in our time.

Tsuwalkai Marimi could go out now and dig roots. She was free to go
anywhere. While digging one day she saw the strong stalk of shitpayu
sticking out of the ground. She dug around it and below the roots,
found a little baby. The stem was growing out of the child's navel.
She took the baby, twisted the stalk off, and bound up the child. She
had nothing to wrap around the little one; so she took her skirt made
of buckskin, the only clothing she wore, and wrapped it around the
baby. Holding it close to her breast, she fondled the child and
said,--

"Grow, little boy, grow quickly; you will be company yet for your
grandmother."

She brought the boy home, washed him, washed him many times, put him
in a wildcat skin. When Tsawandi Kamshupa came and saw Tsuwalkai with
the baby, he wondered and cried,--

"Oh, grandmother, where did you find the little boy?"

She told how she had found him in the field, dug him out of the
ground, and brought him home. That same day Dari Jowa, Tsawandi
Kamshupa's great friend, came, and, seeing the little boy, laughed
loudly.

"Oh, my aunt," said he, "that is not your baby. Where did you find
that little boy?"

She told him the same story that she had told her grandson.

The baby grew quickly, grew large in a little while.

"Oh, my aunt," said Dari Jowa, "give this boy to me. I want to hear
him talk. I want him for myself. I will take good care of him. I want
to hear him talk, I want to hear him shout. He will be a great
shouter. Oh, my aunt, give this little boy to me."

The old woman agreed at last. Dari Jowa took the boy and called him
Ilhataina. One day Dari Jowa brought Ilhataina to the sweat-house and
said, "Talk now."

Ilhataina began to talk, and the sweat-house trembled. He shouted; the
whole earth shook. He was thundering.




ILHATAINA


PERSONAGES

After each name is given that of the creature or thing into which the
personage was changed subsequently.

=Ahalamila=, gray wolf; =Demauna=, pine marten; =Gowila=, lizard;
=Ilhataina=, lightning; =Jul Kurula=, woodgrub; =Jupka=, butterfly of
the wild silkworm; =Tsoré Jowá=, a kind of eagle.

       *       *       *       *       *

Near Jigulmatu lived Tsore Jowa, a very old woman. Once in the spring
she went west to dig roots, and found a great clump of them. "I'll
come to-morrow and dig these," thought she, and went home.

Next morning she went to get the roots. She dug around the whole
clump, but could not pull it up. She dug deeper, pulled and tugged; at
last the roots came, and on them a little boy with eyes staring out of
his head. She pushed the eyes back, cured him, put him in a
rabbit-skin blanket which she wore, and went home. She washed the boy
all day, and did not sleep at night. She washed him all the time. When
five days old, he had grown a good deal. On the sixth day he crept; on
the ninth he walked. When fifteen days old, he was a strong but very
small boy.

"I want a bow and arrows," said he.

"You must not go out," said the old woman, "you must not leave my
sight."

He teased till at last she gave him a bow and said, "You must stay on
the housetop, and not go away."

While he was on the house a bird flew up, perched on a tree-top, and
asked, "Why doesn't your mother nurse you?"

The bird repeated this and flew away. The boy cried; came down and
told his grandmother.

"Where are our people? Tell me," said he.

"Our people were many," said she, "but Gowila killed them all. We have
no people now."

"Who is Gowila?"

"Oh, he is strong and terrible; you must not see Gowila."

The boy walked around the house then, looked at the walls, and asked,
"May I have that bow hanging there?"

"You may if you like," said she, "but you are too weak to use it. You
are very small, a little fellow."

He started at the east side of the sweat-house and went northward,
tried the first bow, broke it; went on, took another, broke that. Then
he went around the whole house, breaking every bow that he came to,
till on the south side he reached the last bow. It was made of deer
sinew. He bent that, tried his best, tried again and again, could not
break it. "What kind of a bow is this?" thought he. "It is the
ugliest, the oldest, but I cannot break it." He took the bow and a big
stone to crush it. The bow flew out of his hand, and the stone fell.

"How did the man die who used this bow?" asked the boy.

"Gowila killed him, and those who had the other bows," answered the
old woman.

"I will go for wood now and sweat."

"Do not go far," said Tsore Jowa.

The boy ran off to the east, seized a big pine-tree, tore it up with
one pull, and took it home in one hand. He made a big fire and put
stones on it.

"Bring water, my grandmother," said he; "then I will tell you what to
do." The old woman filled a great basket with water. The stones were
dropped in when red-hot, and the water boiled quickly.

"Grandmother, put me into the boiling water."

The old woman was frightened, but did what he told her.

"Cover me closely," said the boy.

She covered him with another tight basket. He lay in the water till
the cover flew from the basket, and he was thrown through the opening
in the top of the sweat-house and dropped on the roof outside. He ran
down, swam in the river close by, and then went back and talked with
the old woman.

"You will be very strong," said she. "You will be called Ilhataina."

He ran east a second time; brought sugar-pines. He did not sleep, he
sang without stopping. Rocks were made hot as before, and dropped into
a bigger basket. The old woman put in Ilhataina, and covered him with
four closely woven baskets. He was in the boiling water till the four
covers burst off, and he flew up through the opening in the top of
the sweat-house. He ran down again to the river, and while swimming
talked to himself, saying,--

"I will meet Gowila to-day, I will meet Gowila to-day."

At sunrise he went home. "Grandmother, I am going out a short way,"
said he, taking down his old bow and one arrow.

"Oh, grandson, you must not go far; you must not leave my sight," said
the old woman.

He counted twenty otter-skin quivers filled with arrows, and said, "I
will take these."

She cooked roots for his breakfast, and brought a small basket full
for him to take with him. He went west to a grove of trees, made a
fire there, and caused salmon to hang all around on the tree branches.
Crowds of men and women were heard talking and laughing near by. He
made it so. There were no people in the place. He made the noise to
entice Gowila.

He began to dig roots then. He dug without raising his head, dug and
worked on, singing songs as he worked. Soon a big ugly old man from
the north came. This was Gowila. He had a great dog, and a deer head
was hanging at his back, with long horns on each side of it.

"You sing a nice song," said he.

Ilhataina never looked up.

"Come to the fire," said Gowila.

The boy said nothing; dug all the time.

"Come to the fire; I am hungry," said Gowila.

After a time Ilhataina went to the fire.

"You sing well," said Gowila. "Where did you come from?"

"From Jigulmatu. People sing well at Jigulmatu, and they dance well."

Gowila sat down near the fire. "Put roots in my mouth. Put in more,"
said he, when the boy gave him some.

The boy fed Gowila until he had eaten all the roots in the basket.

"How many people are digging roots around here?" asked he.

"I do not know; a great many," said Ilhataina.

A loud noise of people was heard a short distance away,--a noise of
men and women laughing and talking. Gowila saw blankets and baskets
near the fire. Ilhataina made the appearance of them. There was
nothing there but the twenty otter-skin quivers and the ugly old bow
and one arrow in his hand.

"Give me your bow," said Gowila; "let me look at it."

He asked again and again till the boy gave the bow. Gowila threw it
into the fire.

"Why do that?" asked Ilhataina, snatching his bow from the fire. "Let
me see your bow."

Gowila handed the bow to him. Ilhataina broke it with his left hand,
and then sprang toward the east. Gowila was very angry, and said
"Teh!" to his dog. The dog rushed at the boy. Ilhataina shot and hit
the dog. He shot all the arrows but one from ten quivers. Every arrow
hit but did no harm to the dog. Just then one of the seven stars (the
Pleiades) called to Ilhataina,--

"Shoot him in the little toe and he will die."

The boy hit the dog's little toe. He fell dead.

Ilhataina ran to the fire where Gowila was standing. "You cannot kill
me," said he to Gowila; "you are big and strong, but you cannot hurt
me."

"I will kill you," said Gowila; and he sent an arrow at him. It
missed.

Ilhataina shot his arrow and it struck. Every arrow that he sent went
into Gowila, but no arrow struck Ilhataina. All the arrows but one
were gone from the second ten quivers. That moment one of the seven
stars called to Ilhataina,--

"Shoot at his little toe. If you hit him there, he will die."

Ilhataina struck Gowila's little toe, and he dropped dead.

Ilhataina skinned Gowila, stripped him from head to foot, put the skin
on himself, and became just like his enemy. Next he struck the dog
with a red rose switch, and the dog jumped up alive and glad to see
his master. Ilhataina hung the deer head behind his shoulders, took
his quivers, and went home. Gowila's dog followed him. When near the
house, he made heavy steps, and the old woman looked out.

"Oh, Gowila is coming! Gowila is coming!" cried she, terribly
frightened.

"Grandmother, don't be afraid; it is I. Gowila is dead. I have killed
him. I am wearing his skin. I am as big and as ugly as he was. I will
go to his house to-night, I think. I have brought his liver and
lights with me."

"Go, grandson, go. I fear nobody now."

Ilhataina went away, saying, "I will be here about sunrise to-morrow."

He went north to Gowila's sweat-house, went a long way, went quickly,
walked up to the house, was just like Gowila. A great many people lived
in that house. All kinds of snake people were there,--rattlesnakes,
bull-snakes, water-snakes, striped snakes, all kinds of snakes.

He hung Gowila's liver and lights outside, went in, and sat down
between Gowila's two wives. The dog lay down in his own place. The
wives were Pupila women, two sisters.

"Bring in the meat which I hung up outside and cook it," said
Ilhataina to the elder wife.

He cut the liver and lights into small bits, and the two women boiled
them. There was a great steam and a strong smell from these pieces.
All in the house were blind except the two wives, and only one of the
blind people spoke, Gowila's younger brother. "I smell Gowila's
flesh," said he.

"How could you smell Gowila's flesh when I am Gowila?"

Ilhataina was very angry, and dashed live coals through the house. All
were terrified. All ate of the meat except Gowila's younger brother.
He was very wise and wouldn't touch it.

Ilhataina went out and found a great many legs around the house.
Gowila had eaten the bodies of thousands of people and thrown the legs
away. Ilhataina gathered these into one place and went back to the
house.

"Blind people," said he, "I wish you would sing, and you, my wives,
dance for me. I'll go to sleep then."

"We will sing," said they, "and dance."

The blind people sang, and the two women danced. Soon the men and the
two women stopped. Ilhataina made them all drowsy, and they fell
asleep. Then he went out, fastened the door, and said,--

"I want the walls of this house to be covered with pitch."

The whole house was covered with pitch, and then he set fire to it.
Soon he heard terrible screaming inside and crowds running around in
the sweat-house. None could get out, and all were burned to death
quickly.

Ilhataina tied the legs together with a long grapevine and carried
them home. He was there about daylight. He placed them all in the
river and went to the sweat-house.

"Hide me, and then lie on your face with your arms under your head,"
said he to his grandmother.

The old woman put him in one basket and covered him with another, then
lay herself as he had directed.

In the middle of the forenoon there was a great noise of people rising
out of the river. They came in through the top of the sweat-house.
When all were inside, the old woman stood up. All her people were
alive there before her,--Demauna, Jupka, and others; all had come
back.

"Who brought us to life again?" asked Demauna. "Show me the person."

The old woman took Ilhataina out of the basket and carried him to
them. Demauna caught him in his arms. "Well done, my brother!" said
he. All the rest called him brother.

"Let me have him," said Ahalamila.

"No," answered Demauna; "I will keep him myself."

They asked the old woman where she had found Ilhataina. She would not
tell.

"Will you sweat?" asked Ilhataina.

"Yes," said all the people.

"I will bring wood," said he.

When he ran out, the sweat-house danced in its place. All thought he
was too small to carry wood, but when he snatched a tall fir the earth
trembled. When he touched a big sugar-pine, he crushed it. He brought
great trees in a moment, and when he put them down the place shivered.
All were in terror.

When Ilhataina talked the whole world was afraid, and when he moved
the ground which he walked on was quivering.

All sweated, swam in the river, and went back to the old woman's.
Ilhataina walked across the house, and his heart shook as if it would
jump from his body.

"I am not going to stay here," said he.

When Demauna heard this, he cried, and the old woman cried.

"My brother," said Demauna, "I should like to know where you are
going. I wish you would stay with us."

Ilhataina made no answer.

"My brother," said Jupka, "if you will not stay here, I wish you
would go to the sky. Now," said Jupka, "will you take beads as a gift
from me?"

"No."

"Shells?"

"No."

"Wolf robes?"

"No."

"Wildcat robes?"

"No."

"Foxskin robes?"

"No."

Jupka wore an old ragged rabbit-skin robe. He had worn it a long time.
"I think you like this," said he.

"Yes," answered Ilhataina, "that's what I want." He took the old robe
and tied it with weeds around his waist. "Now I am ready to leave you.
Come out and see me go."

There was a black cloud in the sky. Ilhataina had brought it there. "I
will go up to that place," said he. "Whenever rain comes in future, it
will be water falling from my rabbit robe."

All hurried out. Jupka's son, Jul Kurula, who was wrapped in a black
bearskin, came down into the sweat-house and cried; he didn't wish to
lose Ilhataina.

"Now, my friends," said Ilhataina, "I leave you; hereafter when you
see me travel I shall go like this;" and he went with a flash to the
black cloud.

He was taken into it, and now he stays there.




HITCHINNA


PERSONAGES

After each name is given that of the creature or thing into which the
personage was changed subsequently.

=Hitchinna=, wildcat; =Hitchín Marimi=, wildcat woman, his wife;
=Hitchinpa=, young wildcat; =Metsi=, coyote; =Putokya=, skull people,
or head people.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hitchinna had a wife and a son a few days old. Hitchinpa, the little
son, was sleeping, and Hitchin Marimi, the wife, was taking care of
her child. Hitchinna had dreamed the night before, and his dream was a
bad one.

"I had a dream last night," said he to his wife, "a very bad dream."

"What did you dream?" asked she.

"I dreamed that I climbed a big pine-tree; the tree was full of cones.
I was throwing them down, had thrown down a great many, when at last I
threw down my right arm. I dreamed then that I threw down my left
arm."

He told her no more. That morning early, before he had talked of his
dream, the woman said,--

"I should like to have pine-nuts; I want to eat pine-nuts; I am hungry
for pine-nuts."

He went out to find the nuts, and she went with him, taking the baby.
They came to a large pine-tree, and he climbed it. Hitchin Marimi put
the baby aside on the ground, and made a fire at some distance to
roast the pine-cones.

Hitchinna threw down cones; she roasted them to get out the nuts. He
threw down a great many cones. She roasted these cones and pounded the
nuts out.

After a while Hitchinna's right arm fell off; he threw that to the
ground, then he threw down his left arm. His left leg came off; he
threw it down. Next his right leg dropped off, and he threw that to
the ground.

The woman was roasting and pounding the pine-cones; she did not look
around for a good while. At last she went to the tree, found blood on
it, and looking up, saw that her husband was throwing himself down,
that there was not much left of his body.

Hitchin Marimi was scared half to death; she ran away home. She was so
terrified that she left the little child behind, forgot all about it.
When she reached home, she called the people together and said,--

"My husband went up into a pine-tree; he threw down a great many
pine-cones. Then he began to throw himself down; first he threw one
arm, then the other. We must hurry and hide somewhere; he will be bad
very soon; he will kill us all if he finds us."

The people asked, "Where can we go to hide from him,--north, south,
east, or west?"

"I know a good place," said one man, "and it is not too far from
here,--Wamarawi."

"Well, we must go to that place, and go very quickly," said
Hitchinna's wife; and all the people agreed with her.

The people ran to Wamarawi, which is a round mountain; they ran the
whole way and went into a cave in the mountain. When all were inside,
they closed the entrance very firmly, shut it up tight. Nothing could
get in through that door.

After his wife had run home, Hitchinna threw down his ribs one by one,
and kept asking his wife if she was there. He got no answer. She was
gone and he did not know it. He threw down first all the ribs of his
right side, then all of his left side. Every time he threw a rib he
called, "Uh! Uh!" to his wife.

At last there was nothing left of him on the tree but his head, and
that came down soon after. His eyes were very big now, sticking out,
staring with a wild and mad look. The head lay under the tree a while.
Hitchinna had become another kind of people. He had become a Putokya.
He was one of the skull people, a very bad terrible people. Each one
of them is nothing but a skull.

Putokya is new now. He has a new mind, new wishes. He is under the
tree, and lies there a little while. He cannot walk any more. He can
only roll on the ground like a ball. After resting and thinking a
while, he starts to find his wife; rolls till he comes to the fire.
There is no woman there. He looks around, cannot find her, looks
again, and sees the baby. He rolls to the baby, catches it in his
mouth, eats up the baby in one moment. The head talks then, and
says,--

"I dreamed last night that I ate up my own son."

He is dreadful now. He scatters the pine-cones, quenches the fire,
rages, roars awfully, a real Putokya. He rolls, bounds, knocks against
a tree, cuts it down, breaks it to pieces, scatters it.

Next he starts for the village, springing and bounding along like a
football, making a terrible wind as he goes, reaches the house, looks
through it. All are gone from the house and from the village. All have
run off to Wamarawi.

First he knocks against his own house, breaks it, smashes it to
pieces, and then he breaks all the other houses in the same way, one
after another. He scatters and smashes up everything, wrecks the whole
village, just as if a strong whirlwind had gone through it. The people
are all in Wamarawi, in the stone cave in the mountain, a very great
crowd of them.

Putokya looks around, finds tracks, follows the people southward, goes
with a terrible roar, raising a storm as he moves. He breaks
everything he strikes, except rocks. From these he bounds off like a
football.

He follows the people of the village, follows on their tracks, stops
before Wamarawi, rolls up to the entrance, listens quietly, hears a
sound inside like the buzzing of bees. Putokya is glad. He stops a
while and thinks what to do. "You cannot go from me now," says he.

All the people were inside except Metsi; he had gone north somewhere.

"I will break in the cave," said Putokya.

He began at the west side, went back a whole mile, bounded, rushed,
hurled himself at the mountain, whistled through the air with a noise
like the loudest wind, struck the mountain, made a great hole in it,
but could not go through to the cave. Putokya felt sure that he could
break through. He went back a whole mile again from the north side,
bounded, rushed forward, made a tremendous hole in the north side; but
he could not go through, and the rock closed again.

The people inside are glad now; they are laughing, they think
themselves safe,--jeer at Putokya. Putokya hears them. He is angrier
than ever, he is raging. "I will try the east side," said he; "that is
better."

He went back as before, bounded forward, made a deep hole in the east,
but it closed again, and he left it. He tried the south. It was just
like the other sides. Putokya stops a while, is afraid that he cannot
get in, that he cannot get at the people.

"The Yana are not very wise," said he. "I should like to know who told
them what to do. They did not know themselves. Who told them to go to
Wamarawi?"

He tried to go to the top of the mountain and make a hole there. He
could not roll up in any way. He fell back each time that he tried. He
could travel on level ground only, he could only rise by bounding.

"I cannot go up there, I am not able," said he.

He lay down close to the entrance of the cave and thought a while. He
made up his mind to bound like a ball, to spring from point to point,
higher and higher, on neighboring mountains, till he got very high,
and then come down on the top of Wamarawi. He did this, went far up on
the top of other and higher mountains till at last he was very high;
then with a great bound he came down on the top of Wamarawi, came down
with a terrible crash. He made an awfully big hole in it, bigger than
all the four holes he had made in the sides put together; and this
hole did not close, but it did not reach the cave.

After that blow he came again to level ground. He lay there and said
to himself: "I have tried five times to get at those people. I will
try once more. I may get at them this time."

He went high up in the sky, higher than before. He was angrier and
madder than ever, and he came down with a louder crash; the whole
mountain shook and trembled. No one inside the cave was laughing now;
all the people were terrified.

Putokya went almost through to the cave. The rock above the people was
very thin after this blow, and the hole did not close again.

"I will not try any more," said Putokya; "I cannot get at the people."
He was discouraged, and left Wamarawi.

All the people within were in terror. "If he tries once more, we are
lost," said they. "He will burst through and eat us, eat every one of
us."

The great hole remained on that mountain top, and people say that
there is a lake up there now with goldfish in it.

Putokya started north, went toward Pulshu Aina, his own village. As he
went toward home, he made a great roaring and wind, cut down trees and
brush, people, beasts, everything that he met; he left a clean road
behind. He swept through Pulshu Aina, and went farther north, went
almost to Jigulmatu.

Metsi was coming down to the south, along the same trail; he was very
well dressed. Metsi always dressed well. He wore a splendid elkskin
belt and a hair net; he was fine-looking.

Metsi was right in the middle of the trail. He had learned that
Putokya was out killing people in the south; he heard the roar a great
way off, and said to himself,--

"I hear Putokya; he is killing all the people."

Metsi thought over what he was to do. "I will meet him. I will say to
this Putokya, 'You are smart, you are good, but you are sick. I will
cure you.'"

Metsi took off all his fine clothes in a hurry and hid them, made
himself naked. "I must be quick," said he; "the noise and wind are
coming nearer and nearer. I wish a rusty old basket to be here before
me." The basket was there. He wished for an old strap to carry it. The
old strap was there with the basket.

Metsi made buckskin rings around his arms and legs, turned himself
into an old, very old woman, all bent and wrinkled, with a buckskin
petticoat. He put the rusty basket on his back.

Putokya was hurrying on; the roar grew louder and nearer. Metsi knew
that Putokya was very dangerous, and that he must be careful. He took
white clay, painted his face, made a regular old woman of himself.
Putokya came near. Metsi was ready, the basket on his back and a stick
in his hand. He was walking along slowly, a very old woman and
decrepit. The old woman began to cry, "En, en, en!"

Putokya stopped on the road, made no noise, listened to the old woman.

"He has stopped; he is listening to me," said Metsi; and he cried
more, cried in a louder voice and more pitifully.

Putokya was quiet. Metsi walked right up to him, looked at him, and
said, "I came near stepping on you." Metsi was crying more quietly
now.

"Are you a dead person?" asked Metsi.

Putokya was silent.

"I heard you from where I was," said Metsi; "when you had a bad dream,
I heard you in the south, heard you everywhere, heard you when you
turned to be a Putokya, one of the head people, and wanted to kill
everybody. You used to be good, you used to be wise, but now you are
sick; you will die, and be among people no longer unless you are
cured. That is why I started to come south; I started south to find
you, to see you. It is a good thing that you came up here; now I see
you. I am your relative, your cousin. I want you to be healthy, to be
as you were before; to have your arms and legs again, to feel well. I
want to cure you."

Metsi was sobbing all this time. He pretended to be awfully sorry; he
wasn't, for Metsi wasn't sorry for any one, didn't care for any one on
earth; he only wanted to put Putokya out of the way, to kill him.
Metsi was a great cheat.

"A good while ago," said Metsi, "I met a man like you. He had had a
dream, and he was nothing but a head, just like you. I travelled then
as I am travelling to-day, and met this man just as I meet you now on
this road. If you believe what I tell you, all right; if you don't
believe, it's all the same to me. I will tell you what I did for that
man, how I cured him. Do you want me to tell you what I did for him?"

Putokya was looking all the time with great wildcat eyes at the old
woman. Now he spoke, saying: "Talk more, tell me all, old woman. I
want to hear what you have to say."

"Well, I made a man of that head," said the old woman. "I cured that
Putokya; I made him over. I made him new, and he walked around as well
as before; I gave him legs and arms; all the bad went out of him; I
made him clean and sound and good again."

"How did you do that, old woman?" asked Putokya. "How can you make a
man over again? I want to see that."

"I will tell you how I do it. I will fix you; I will fix you right
here on this road, just as I fixed that other man. I made a hole in
the ground; a long hole, a pretty big one. I lined it with rocks; I
made a little fire of manzanita wood, and when it was nice and warm in
the hole, I put plenty of pitch in, and put the man on top of the
pitch. It was good and soft for him, and nice and pleasant on the
pitch. I put a flat rock over the hole. He stayed there a while and
was cured."

Putokya believed all this; had full faith in Metsi, and said,--

"Very well, you fix me as you fixed that other man; make me new again,
just as I used to be."

Metsi added: "I put pitch very thick, one foot all around, and put him
in the warm hole; covered him up. Pretty soon he began to stretch and
grow; grew till he was as good as ever. That is how I cured that man."

"That is good," said Putokya. "Fix me in that way; fix me just as you
fixed him."

"I will," said Metsi. "I will fix you just as I fixed that man, and
you will come out just as he did; you will be in the right way and
have no more trouble; you will never be sick again."

Metsi did everything as he had said; made a long deep hole, put in
fire and a great deal of pitch, a foot thick of it.

He placed Putokya on the pitch; put a wide flat stone over him, put on
others; put the stones on very quickly, till there was a great pile of
them.

The pitch began to burn well, to grow hot, to seethe, to boil, to
blaze, to burn Putokya.

He struggled to bound out of the pitch; the stones kept him down, the
pitch stuck to him. He died a dreadful death.

If Putokya had got out of the hole, there would have been hard times
in this world for Metsi.

When Putokya was dead under the pile of rocks, Metsi threw away his
old things, his basket and buckskin petticoat, put on his nice
clothes, and went along on his journey.

Metsi was a great cheat. He could change himself always, and he fooled
people whenever he had a chance; but he did a good thing that time,
when he burned up Putokya.




TIRUKALA


PERSONAGES

After each name is given that of the creature or thing into which the
personage was changed subsequently.

=Chíchepa=, spotted chicken-hawk; =Chikpina=, weasel; =Hapawila=,
water snake; =Jewinna=, chicken-hawk; =Jewinpa=, young chicken-hawk;
=Kedila=, soaproot plant; =Matsklila=, turkey buzzard; =Pakálai
Jáwichi=, water lizard; =Tirúkala=, lamprey eel; =Wirula=, red fox.
=Weanmauna= means the hidden one.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tirukala lived near Jamahdi, on the Juka Mapti Mountain, and he was
thinking, thinking for a long time, how to change this world, how to
make it better.

"I have to fix this country. I will fix it now," said Tirukala. "I
will make it better to live in."

When he had said this he went off walking and began to sing. All the
mountains stood too near together at that time, and Tirukala pushed
the mountains apart from one another, made room between them. He put
creeks everywhere, and big and little rivers. He made springs in
different places and swamps. He put salmon and other fish into rivers
and creeks, plenty of them everywhere.

Tirukala had two persons to help him, Pakalai Jawichi and Hapawila.
The three lived together, working and making the world better to live
in.

Tirukala never ate anything; never took food of any kind. He worked
always, and sang while at work. Hapawila made salmon traps and caught
many salmon. Just like Tirukala, he sang all the time. After a while
two young girls heard this singing. They were the two daughters of
Kedila. They went out to get wood one day and heard the singing.

They filled their baskets and went home, put the wood down, then went
out and listened to the singing. They thought it was very sweet and
beautiful.

"Let us go nearer to the singing," said the younger sister.

They went a little way from the house, sat down, and listened. Again
they stood up and went on. Two or three times they did this, going
farther and farther. Soon they came in sight of a salmon trap and went
up to it.

"I see no one here," said each of the sisters. "Who can be singing?"

They looked on all sides of the trap and saw no one. They looked up
and down the river. There was no one in sight. They sat down near the
trap, watched and listened. At last the younger girl saw who was
singing. She saw Hapawila in the river, where he was singing.

When he saw the girls sitting and listening, Hapawila came out to
them.

"Which way are you going?" asked he.

"We heard singing, and came out to listen. That is why we are here,"
answered the elder.

"Let us go home," said the younger.

"Take some of my salmon to your father," said Hapawila; and he gave
them two very nice salmon.

They took the salmon home to their father.

"Where did you get these salmon?" asked Kedila.

"A man who sings and has salmon-traps sent them to you."

That evening Hapawila went to old Kedila's house. The girls saw him
coming and were frightened. They liked his singing, but they did not
like his appearance. They ran away, found a great tree, climbed it,
and thought to spend the night there. But Hapawila tracked them, came
to the foot of the tree, looked up, and saw the two sisters near the
top. He walked around, and looked at the tree.

"Let him come up," said the elder sister, "let him talk a while: we
may like him better if he talks to us."

"No," said the younger sister, "I don't like him; I don't want to talk
with him."

He tried to climb the tree, but could not. The trunk was smooth, and
the tree had no branches except at the top. Now the elder sister fixed
the tree so that he could climb to them; she wished for branches on
the trunk--they were there at once, and Hapawila climbed up to
Kedila's two daughters.

The younger sister was angry at this; hurried down the tree, ran home,
and told her father that her sister and Hapawila were talking to each
other in the tree-top.

Old Kedila said nothing, and went to bed. A few minutes later the
elder sister was at home. She, too, ran from Hapawila when she saw him
the third time.

Early next morning Kedila was very angry. He caught his elder
daughter, thrust her into the fire, burned her, and threw her out of
doors. The younger sister took up her sister's body, and cried
bitterly. After a while she carried it to a spring, crying as she
carried it. She washed her sister's body in the water. It lay one
night in the spring. At daylight next morning the elder sister came
out of the water alive, with all her burns cured and not a sore left
on her.

"Where can we go now? Our father is angry; he will kill us if we go
home," said the younger sister.

Both started west, singing as they travelled.

"I wish that I had a basket with every kind of nice food in it," said
the younger sister toward evening. Soon a basket was right there. It
dropped down in front of her. She looked. There were pine nuts in the
basket, different roots, and nice food to eat.

Now, Jewinna lived in the west. He had a very large sweat-house and
many people. His youngest and only living son he kept wrapped up and
hidden away in a bearskin.

At sunset the two girls came to Jewinna's house, and put down their
basket of roots near the doorway. Jewinna's wife went out and brought
in the two girls. Jewinna himself spread out a bearskin and told the
girls to sit on it. He said to his son, who was wrapped up and hidden
away,--

"Come out and sit down with these two young girls who have come to
us."

The youth looked through a small hole in his bearskin; saw the two
women, but said nothing; didn't come out. When night fell, the two
girls went to sleep. Next morning they rose, washed, dressed, and
combed nicely. Then they went eastward, went toward their father's
house.

Jewinna's son, Jewinpa, came out soon after, swam, dressed, ate, and
followed the two girls. They went very fast, went without stopping;
but Jewinpa caught up and went with them to their father's house.

Kedila was pleased with Jewinpa, and treated both his own daughters
well. He spoke to them as if nothing had happened.

Old Jewinna in the west called all his people and said: "I want you,
my people, to sweat and swim, then come here and listen to me."

After they had done this, Jewinna said: "I am sorry that my son has
gone. I must follow him to-morrow. I don't know why he went. I do not
wish him to go far from this place. Be ready, all of you, and we will
go to-morrow."

Jewinna rose before daylight, called all his people, and said: "I
cannot eat. I am sorry that my son has gone."

All took plenty of arrows and beads and otter-skins and red-headed
woodpecker scalps, and started to follow the young man. As he started,
Jewinna sang,--

    "I-no-hó, i-no-hó no-há, i-no-hó!"

A great many followed and repeated,--

    "I-no-hó, i-no-hó no-há, i-no-hó!"

They went on all day, went quickly, and at sunset they were on a
smooth plain, not far from Kedila's place. Kedila had a large, rich
sweat-house, and it was full of people. The old chief had a great many
sons-in-law, and a great many people to serve him.

Jewinna and his men reached the place some time before nightfall, and
Kedila went to the top of his sweat-house and said to the strangers,--

"I want you all to come in and enjoy yourselves. Perhaps my house is
small; we will make it bigger."

He blew toward all the four sides then, and said, "Be bigger, my
sweat-house, be bigger!"

The sweat-house stretched out and was very large. There was room for
every one, and all came in.

"Bring food, my sons-in-law, for Jewinna and his people," said Kedila.

They brought in all kinds of good food, and fed every one gladly.

"Bring your beads, otter-skins, and red-headed woodpecker scalps, and
put them down here at this side of the sweat-house," said Jewinna to
his people.

All were brought in and given to Kedila. He took these rich things
gladly, and put them away.

Kedila put down on his part wolfskins with deerskins and gave them to
Jewinna.

"Let ten of you go out and hunt squirrels," said Jewinna to his people
next morning; "let others fix heads on their arrows."

One of the ten saw a squirrel on a tree; he took a club, climbed after
the squirrel, and killed it; he saw another and another; the tree was
filled with squirrels. A second man saw squirrels in a second tree,
and then a third and a fourth in other trees. Right away the ten were
killing squirrels on ten trees, and soon they had ten piles of
squirrels, each pile as large as one man could carry.

The two chiefs were delighted when they saw the ten loads of game, and
there was a great feast of squirrel flesh that day at Kedila's.

Both sides sat down then to gamble, played with sticks, gambled all
day, played till sunset. They bet all kinds of skins. Jewinna's men
won a great many things, and won more than the presents.

Next morning Kedila's sons-in-law wanted to win back the beautiful
skins and other things which they had played away, but before noon
they had lost everything. When all was gone, Kedila's men were angry.

"You don't play fairly," said they to Jewinna's men; "you shall not
have these things."

"We have won everything fairly," said Jewinna's men, "and we will take
these things home with us."

They began to fight at once. Kedila's sons-in-law attacked Jewinna's
men as soon as they were outside the sweat-house.

"We are here to fight if there is need," said Jewinna; "go ahead, my
men, you are likely to die, every one of you."

Jewinna's men fought, going westward, fought carrying with them what
they had won. Jewinna fought bravely, and sang as he fought. Kedila's
people followed.

They fought till near sunset. All were killed now but eight men, four
on each side,--Jewinna, his half-brother, and two more western people.
Kedila and three others of the eastern people were alive yet.

These eight closed once more in fight; both chiefs fell with Jewinna's
half-brother and Kedila's youngest son-in-law. Matsklila was so sorry
for this last one that he threw away bow and arrows and fell to the
ground crying bitterly. Seeing this, Chikpina picked up a rock and
beat Matsklila's brains out. Wirula on Kedila's side killed Chikpina,
and there were only two left,--Chichepa, the last of Jewinna's men,
and Wirula, the last on Kedila's side.

"Now," said Wirula, "we have fought enough. You are alone. Go home and
tell the women that your people are all killed. I am alone. I will go
home and say that all our people are dead."

Jewinna had taken his son with him when he left Kedila's house, and
he, too, had been killed in the struggle.

Now Wirula and Chichepa started off in opposite directions; went a
little way; lay down and rolled along the ground, crying and
lamenting. Wirula sprang up and said,--

"I will kill that Chichepa. I will kill him surely, and there will not
be one left of our enemies."

Wirula turned and followed Chichepa slowly; drew his bow and sent an
arrow after him. But Chichepa dodged; the arrow missed. Then Wirula
ran away.

"I will kill that Wirula now," said Chichepa.

He turned and followed carefully, cautiously; came up with him, and
struck him fairly on the skull. Wirula dropped dead.

Chichepa turned homeward now, crying all the time. When he was near
home, the women saw him stagger, then saw him fall. When he reached
the top of the sweat-house, he fell in, rolled along the floor, and
cried. He ate nothing that night; he was too sorry for his people. He
slept a while and then woke up crying.

Early next morning he took ten otter-skins; went back to the dead
people, pulled one hair from the head of each one of them, and filled
the ten otter-skins with the hairs. He had the work done before
sunset.

"Build a good fire," said he to the women when he reached home that
night. "Give me four big water-baskets." They gave the baskets. He
filled these with water, and put hot rocks in them. Then he emptied
the ten otter-skins into the water.

"Stay all night in your houses. Let no one put a head out. I will stay
in the sweat-house," said he.

The four baskets boiled hard. Just at daylight the largest basket fell
over; then the second, the third, and the fourth fell. After that
there were voices all around the sweat-house, hundreds upon hundreds
of them.

"We are cold; open the door," cried the voices.

When full daylight had come, Chichepa opened the door, and all hurried
in. Jewinna came first, and with him his son. All followed them,
dressed as they had been when they went to Kedila's; all alive and
well, strong and healthy. Jewinna laughed. He was glad.

On the way home Kedila's two daughters had two sons, the sons of
Jewinpa. The boys were born the next day after Jewinpa had looked on
their mothers. They had come from the eyes of their father. He had
just looked through his fingers at Kedila's two daughters.

After Jewinna's son had been killed and then brought to life by
Chichepa, he went east to Kedila's great sweat-house, stayed five days
and nights there, then took his two wives and two sons and went back
to his father's.

Kedila's youngest son, born when his father was old, came to life. He
had sat always at the central pillar, at the edge of the ashes, and
had always kept moving his arms, but he had never danced on that or on
any floor. He had burned his face because he had sat so near the fire,
and had sweated often from being so near it.

Every one laughed at him; jeered at that "Burnt Face," who sat night
and day in the ashes. He spat always in one place. Kedila's eldest son
had said many times,--

"If we are killed, we shall come back to life again."

"I don't think that you will," said Burnt Face; "but when I am killed
I shall live again through my own power."

Burnt Face went out to fight, and was killed with the others. Now a
little baby came right up out of the spittle of Burnt Face, a boy.
The women took him and washed him. In one hour he had grown a good
deal, in two hours still more. On the following day he had full
growth.

Then this young man who had risen from the spittle went out of the
house. He followed the course of the struggle, found all Kedila's
people dead, struck each with his foot, turned him over. All came to
life and rose up, as well as ever.

When Jewinna came for his wives, their brothers and brothers-in-law
gave the women presents; but when his two wives and two sons went home
with him and old Jewinna saw them coming, he took two bearskins
quickly, and when they were on top of the sweat-house, he caught the
young boys, put them into the bearskins, rolled them up, and put them
away to be Weanmauna.




SUKONIA'S WIVES AND THE ICHPUL SISTERS


PERSONAGES

After each name is given that of the creature or thing into which the
personage was changed subsequently.

=Chikpitpa=, young weasel; =Jahtaneno=, a kind of shell creature;
=Metsi=, coyote; =Ichpul=, frog; =Sukónia=, a name of pine martin,
whose ordinary name is Demauna; =Tsoré Jowá=, a kind of eagle.

       *       *       *       *       *

Old Jahtaneno had a great many daughters, and all but two of these
were married.

At that time Sukonia was a great chief in this country about us. He
had a large sweat-house, and many people to serve him.

One day Jahtaneno called his daughters and said: "My girls, I want you
to go to Sukonia's house. I have heard that he is very rich; go and
see him. He has no wife yet; he may marry you. Rise early in the
morning, bathe, comb your hair, go and see the chief Sukonia."

The two sisters made no answer, said nothing, obeyed their father.
They rose early next morning, bathed, combed their hair, painted their
faces red (young people painted red always). Their mother gave each
girl a nice basket; she hung beads on their necks, and put food in
their baskets.

"If any man meets you on the road," said Jahtaneno, at parting, "do
not look at him. A man richly dressed and wearing many beads will
come toward you, will speak to you; do not look at that man; he is no
one but Metsi."

The two girls began to sing when they started, and their song was:--

    "Au ni á, au ni á, mo a wé, he ló,
    Au ni á, au ni á, mo a wé, he ló."

They went northeast, the way which the old man had told them to go. He
warned them further, saying,--

"There is a house this side of Sukonia's, and not very far from it;
two women live in that house, two old maids. Be sure not to stop at
that house. Do not go near these women; pass their place quickly, do
not stop before it, do not talk to the women. They are bad, evil
women. If you go into their house, you will never come out of it; if
you go, you will be killed there."

Jahtaneno's daughters started, walked away quickly, singing as they
went,--

    "Au ni á, au ni á, mo a wé, he ló,
    Au ni á, au ni á, mo a wé, he ló."

Metsi heard the song; he listened and said to himself: "That is a good
song, that is nice singing; I like to hear that song. I think those
two girls are going to the chief. I think they are going to visit
Sukonia Mujaupa. Now, otter-skins be here before me, and beads in
plenty, and beautiful shells."

He wished for all other things that he liked. Metsi dressed himself
richly and waited.

Jahtaneno's daughters walked and walked on without stopping, met no
one on the way till they came to where Metsi was waiting. The younger
sister was walking ahead; she saw Metsi at one side of the trail, but
would not look at him a second time. The elder sister looked a second
and a third time.

"I think that is Sukonia Mujaupa," said she.

"Your father would not say so," answered the younger sister; "that is
Metsi."

But the elder sister liked the stranger's appearance; she looked at
him many times.

"I think this is Sukonia," said she.

"Come on with me," said the younger sister. "Have you lost your eyes?
That is Metsi."

The younger girl was ahead now some distance; the elder stopped to
look at the stranger more closely.

"Which way are you going?" asked Metsi.

"Our father sent us to Sukonia the chief."

"Oh, I am chief," said Metsi; "you are to come with me. I will start
for home very soon."

"My sister is ahead, she is waiting. I must hurry and tell her first.
I will come back to you then."

She caught up with her sister and said: "I will go with this man; this
is Sukonia, the chief. He said he was chief."

"You must have lost your mind," answered the younger sister; "that is
Metsi. He is no chief, he is not Sukonia."

The elder sister went with the younger, but she wanted to go back to
Metsi, she wished to go with him; she liked his dress, his words
pleased her, she believed him. Both went on, though the elder went
against her will.

"You will see two black bearskins hanging over the sweat-house door,"
said the father, when his daughters were starting. "Stop there; that
is Sukonia's house, that is the house to which you are going."

Toward sunset they came near the place where the Ichpuls lived.

"Let us stop here," said the elder sister, "and get something to eat.
I am hungry."

"Our father told us to pass this house; he told us not to stop near
it, not to go to it, not to look at it," said the younger sister; and
she went on without looking, she went straight ahead.

The elder sister followed her, but followed unwillingly. At last both
came near Sukonia's, and saw the two bearskins hanging out over the
sweat-house.

Chikpitpa, Sukonia's little brother, was on the roof, and Tsore Jowa,
his sister, was at work making a house for herself a little way off at
one side. Chikpitpa ran into the house, calling loudly,--

"Two girls are coming! Two girls are coming with baskets!"

The old man, Sukonia's father, brought bearskins for the young women
to sit on, and waited. The sisters came in and took the places shown
them. Chikpitpa was in a corner when the sisters sat down. He ran to
one and then to the other, looked at them, sat on their laps. He was
very glad that the sisters had come; he liked to be with them and talk
to them.

Old Sukonia went out and called to Tsore Jowa, "Come, my daughter;
bring food to our guests, to the young women who have come to us."

She brought deer's marrow; she brought other kinds of food, too. The
sisters had put down their baskets outside, near the door. On the way
they had said to the baskets, "Let the food in you be nice;" and when
leaving them at the door, they said, "Be large and be full."

The two small baskets stood outside now, very large and full of every
good food. Sukonia came home with, his men about sunset. Chikpitpa
sprang up to the roof of the house, and called to his brother,--

"Two guests have come to our house. Two women are sitting inside. They
are sitting in your place."

The men came in, and Sukonia sat down with the sisters. They pleased
him; he liked their looks.

"Have you brought food to our guests?" asked Sukonia.

"I brought some," said Tsore Jowa.

"Oh, give more. Bring plenty of everything!" The two baskets which
Jahtaneno's daughters had brought were carried into the house. The
sisters invited all present to try their food. All the men ate food
from the baskets and praised it. Sukonia, the chief, was pleased more
and more with the sisters that evening, and married them.

After all the people had eaten next morning, Sukonia went to hunt. He
took many men with him.

That day Sukonia's sisters showed his wives every place in the house
and outside it,--showed them where venison, roots, and acorns were
kept; showed them where the water was. The spring was in the house in
one corner, carefully covered.

After some days Sukonia said to his wives: "I want you to tell me what
your father said when you were leaving him. When does he want you to
go back? When does he wish you to visit him?"

"He did not tell us when to go to him. He did not tell us to go back
at all, he only told us to come here; but we want to see him. We want
to tell him how we live here."

"Well," said Sukonia, "go to-morrow; go to see your father. What does
he eat? What does he like?"

"He eats salmon; he likes nice beads, furs, and shells."

"I will send him some of my meat, I will send him venison. I will send
him beads and furs."

"May I go with my sisters-in-law?" asked Chikpitpa.

"No, I want you here," said Sukonia. "I want you here, my little
brother."

The two women rose early next morning, and Tsore Jowa helped them to
make ready. Sukonia gave them fat venison, and every kind of bright
beads and rich presents for their father.

They started; went as far as the Ichpul house, where the two frog
sisters lived. The two old maids were in the road and spoke to
Sukonia's wives. They were very kind and pleasant.

"Put down your baskets and sit a while with us to talk," said they.

The Jahtaneno sisters were frightened. They did not wish to stop. They
feared the Ichpul women, did not like to make them angry by refusing.
They were afraid to sit down, afraid to refuse.

"Oh, how your hair looks! let me see your head," said one Ichpul woman
to the elder sister.

"Oh, how your hair looks!" said the other to the younger sister; "let
me look at your head."

"Put your head on my lap," said each Ichpul sister to each of
Sukonia's wives.

Each was afraid, but still put her head on the old maid's lap. The
Ichpul sisters killed Sukonia's wives, flayed their bodies, and put
their skins on themselves.

About sunset next day the two frog women went to Sukonia's house; went
in and sat where Jahtaneno's daughters had always sat; took the place
of Sukonia's wives; looked just like them because they had their skins
on.

About dusk Sukonia came home from the hunt. Chikpitpa, who ran ahead,
rushed into the sweat-house to see if his sisters-in-law had come back
from their father's. He saw the two women, looked at them; they seemed
like his sisters-in-law, but when he came near he cried out at once,--

"Phu! they smell like frogs! The Ichpul sisters are here: these are
the frog old maids!"

He cried and ran out to meet his brother.

"Brother," said he, "the Ichpul women are in our house. They killed my
sisters-in-law to-day. I know they did." And he kept crying, "They
killed my sisters-in-law, they killed my poor sisters-in-law!" and he
cried without stopping, cried bitterly.

The two old maids wearing the skins of Sukonia's wives were making
acorn porridge. When it was almost ready, Sukonia looked at the two
women. They seemed like his wives, and he was in doubt, till all at
once he thought: "I will ask them to bring water from the spring. If
they know where the water is, they are my wives; if not, they are
false."

"Bring me water, my wife," said he to one of the women.

She stood up, took a water basket, turned toward the door, and said to
Chikpitpa, "Come out with me for water, my little brother-in-law."

"Wait," said Sukonia. "You need not go now."

She came back to the fire and sat down with her sister. Sukonia knew
now that those were strange women.

"Whip me," said Chikpitpa to his brother, "I will cry, roll around and
kick. I will kick those nasty frogs! I will kill them."

When the acorn porridge was boiling hard, Sukonia struck Chikpitpa
with a switch and scolded him: "Why are you crying? I can do nothing,
you cry so."

The boy rolled on the floor, cried more than ever, kicked, rolled
around, kicked as hard as he could, rolled toward the fire and
kicked, kicked one woman into the boiling porridge, kicked the other
one into the burning fire, and in this way he killed the false
sisters.

Chikpitpa was glad; he laughed. Sukonia threw the two women out doors,
and mourned all that night for his wives. Next morning early he rose
and said, "Stay home to-day, all of you."

"Where are you going?" asked Chikpitpa.

"Stay here, my little brother," said Sukonia. "I am going somewhere."

Sukonia followed the trail of his wives, reached the place where the
Ichpul sisters had stopped them, and found their dead bodies. He took
out his bow-string of deer sinew, struck the two women, called them,
raised them to life.

"How were you killed?" asked Sukonia; "how did it happen? Did you go
to the Ichpul house?"

"We did not go to that house; those two women were out on the road and
they stopped us. They asked us to sit down and talk with them. We were
afraid to sit, afraid to refuse. We sat down, and they killed us."

Sukonia took his wives home. When they were in sight of the house,
Chikpitpa was on the roof watching.

"Oh, those are your sisters-in-law," said he to Tsore Jowa; and he ran
out to meet them.

"Go, now, to your father," said Sukonia, next morning. "Carry presents
and venison to him, and be here at sunset."

The two sisters rose early, took two baskets, and started. At noon
they were at their father's house. Old Jahtaneno was glad when he
looked at his daughters and saw the nice presents.

"Our husband told us to go home to-day, and we cannot stay long with
you."

They took back many presents from their father, and were home at
sunset. They met no trouble on the way. The Ichpul sisters were dead,
and Metsi did not meet them a second time.




THE FINDING OF FIRE


PERSONAGES

After each name is given that of the creature or thing into which the
personage was changed subsequently.

=Ahalamila=, gray wolf; =Au Mujaupa=, master of fire; =Chil Daiauna=,
big hail; =Chil Wareko=, big rain; =Juhauju=, west wind; =Júkami=,
north wind; =Jukilauyu=, east wind; =Juwaju=, south wind; =Gagi=,
crow; =Metsi=, coyote; =Patcha=, snow; =Sabil Keyu=, small hail;
=Shushu Marimi=, dog woman; =Siwegi=, a small bird, unknown.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the beginning Au Mujaupa had fire very far down south on the other
side of a big river. The people in this country had no real fire; they
had a kind of fire, but it wasn't good. It just warmed a little; it
wouldn't cook like the fire which we have now. People killed deer and
fished, but they had to eat fish and venison raw.

In the west people had fire, but it wouldn't cook. In the north there
were many people, and in the east; but they had no fire that would
cook.

"There must be fire in some place," said the people at Pawi; "how can
we find it?"

"I will go out to-night to look," said Ahalamila.

That night he went to look for fire. He went to the top of Wahkanopa,
looked east and west, saw no fire in either place. Next he looked
north; no fire in the north. He looked south; saw no fire anywhere.

Ahalamila came home and talked to the chief and people. "I saw no
fire," said he; "I could not see any, but I will go to a better place
the next time and take some one with me. I will go to-morrow night to
the top of Wahkalu. Who here has a good head, who a sharp eye to see
fire? I want to look for fire to-morrow night from the top of Wahkalu;
from that place I will look all around the whole world to find fire."

"We have a man here," said the chief, "who can see through a tree, who
can see down through the earth to bed rock, who can see through a
mountain. You can take him to-morrow night with you. He is Siwegi."

Ahalamila went to Siwegi. "Will you go to-morrow night to look for
fire?" asked he.

"I will go if the way is not too long."

"Oh," said Ahalamila, "it will not be long. I will shorten it."

Siwegi agreed to go; and when the time came, they started. Ahalamila
doubled up the trail and made it short; in an hour they were on the
top of Wahkalu, both ready now to look for fire. The night is very
dark; they can see the smallest fire easily.

They look to the east, look with great care, look a good while, see no
fire; they look to the north in the same way, see no fire; they look
to the west, no fire there. Now Ahalamila looks south, looks a long
time, and sees nothing: he looks half an hour to the south, sees a
little glimmer like a light very far away.

"Siwegi," said he, "I see a small light down south; it seems like
fire far away. I think it is fire."

"Look again," said Siwegi, "look sharply. Maybe it is fire."

"I have looked enough, I think it is fire," said Ahalamila; "but I
want you to see it, I want you to look now."

Siwegi looked a little while. "Yes, that is fire," said he.

"Well," said Ahalamila, "we see fire, we know that it is far off in
the south."

Ahalamila made the road short, and they were back at Pawi in an hour.
"We have found fire," said Ahalamila to the chief and the people. "We
know where fire is, we can have fire now."

"We must have that fire," said the people.

"There is no way to get the fire but to go for it," said Ahalamila.

"Well," said the chief, "since Ahalamila saw the fire he will go for
it; but the road is long. Who will go and help him? Who will go for
fire with Ahalamila?"

About fifty men offered to go, and they started next morning. The
journey was long and very hard. Soon two or three men were tired and
went home; not long after more were tired, and when they had gone far
down to a great river, just north of where the fire was, of the fifty
who started only three were left,--Ahalamila, Metsi, and old Shushu
Marimi.

Just south of the great river Au Mujaupa had a very big village, and
in the village a large sweat-house. In that house he kept the fire,
and had a great crowd of people living in the country outside who
served him, and kept every one in the world from stealing his fire.
These people were Patcha, Chil Wareko, Chil Daiauna, Sabil Keyu,
Juhauju, Juwaju, Jukami, Jukilauju.

The three, Ahalamila, Metsi, and old Shushu Marimi, were at the
northern end of the bridge, and sat there watching till all at the
sweat-house was quiet. The bridge was very narrow and slippery; so
Ahalamila put pitch on his feet and hands, and on Metsi's and Shushu's
feet and hands. All three crossed without slipping, and found every
one asleep in the sweat-house.

The old chief, Au Mujaupa, had covered the fire well with ashes. All
was silent within and without. Ahalamila, Metsi, and Shushu crept onto
the sweat-house quietly, and looked in. All were asleep.

"I will go down first," said Metsi.

"No, I will go first," said Ahalamila. "I will get the fire and reach
it to you; you take it and run very fast."

Ahalamila slipped down. Metsi and Shushu remained on the roof.
Ahalamila opened the fire carefully, took out a good piece and handed
it to the old woman. She put it in her ear. He handed her another; she
put it in her other ear, slipped down from the top of the sweat-house,
ran across the bridge, and hurried away.

Ahalamila gave Metsi two pieces. He put them in his two ears and
started. Ahalamila filled his own ears and followed.

The three had run over two mountains when Au Mujaupa woke up and saw
that the ashes had been opened, and that fire had been taken, that a
coal had fallen near the central pillar. He sprang up, went to the top
of the sweat-house, shouted, called to all his people,--

"Fire has been stolen! Fire has been stolen! Go, you, and follow!"

Now Patcha, Chil Wareko, Chil Daiauna, Sabil Keyu, and all the wind
people rose up and followed, raced and stormed in every direction. So
much rain came that the whole country was covered with water.

Now Juwaju was ahead of all Au Mujaupa's people chasing the three
robbers. Chil Wareko came too, and fell upon the three furiously; he
drenched and chilled them. Next came Jukami and Patcha, who nearly
froze them.

Metsi was almost dead; the fire went out in both his ears. Ahalamila
lost his fire, too. Chil Wareko, Juwaju, and Patcha quenched it, and
then he let it fall.

Old Shushu was behind a good way, but she ran all the time. She kept
her hand on one ear as she ran. She lost the fire out of her other
ear, and when the piece fell out it broke in two and fell apart. Chil
Wareko picked up the fire and took it back; he found six pieces,
thought that he had all. He and the others stopped following.

Ahalamila and Metsi ran ahead, left old Shushu to get on the best she
could, and reached home first. They were wet, very cold, and tired.

"Where is your fire?" asked the chief.

"I have none; Chil Wareko took my fire," said Ahalamila.

"Where is your fire?" asked the chief.

"Chil Wareko took it," said Metsi.

The chief was very sorry, and all the people were sorry. The old woman
did not come, and the people said, "She must be frozen dead."

At sundown old Shushu came back; she came very slowly, was terribly
tired, but courageous. She reached the sweat-house, came in, said
nothing, lay down wet and cold.

"Where is the fire?" asked she; "did not Ahalamila and Metsi bring
fire? They are young and strong, and had plenty of fire."

After a while she stood up, drew some wood-dust together, then sat
down, opened her ear and held it over the dust; a big piece of fire
came out. Wood was brought quickly, and soon the whole sweat-house was
warm. The people who were cold before were warm now and glad.

"Bring meat and we will try how it tastes when 'tis roasted," said the
chief.

He cut some venison and roasted it. One and another tasted the meat.
"It is very good," said they; a third one said, "I'll try it," and
Gagi took a taste. "Oh, it is sweet, very good," said Gagi.

Each one roasted meat and ate heartily. Next day all went to hunt, and
had a great feast in the evening. A chief from another place came to
the feast and got fire, took it home with him. Soon all people had
fire; every one had fire in all parts of the country.




HAKA KAINA


PERSONAGES

After their transformation the personages in "=Haka Kaina=" were
mainly birds. I have not been able to identify the majority of them,
and would refer to the notes to this myth. =Hwipajusi=, the father of
the three girls, is a whistling swan; we find among the characters
=Gowila=, a lizard, =Malwila=, meadow-lark, and =Maibyu=, wood dove.
The only way to identify such characters surely is to hire men to
shoot them in the woods and mountains. This I have done as often as
possible, but in the present case the specimens were lost before I
could fix their identity. All the information at my disposal now will
be found in the notes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Haka Kaina was the greatest chief in this country; his very large and
beautiful sweat-house was Wahkalu.

One time Haka Kaina stole the three daughters of Hwipajusi, a chief
who lived down in the far south, beyond the valley of the Daha. When
Haka Kaina had brought the three girls home, he said,--

"I must find a good man, a careful man, now, to guard these three
girls, a man who never sleeps in the night-time. Hwipajusi will send
people here to steal them back; we must be ready for his men."

At last the chief chose Hohwitina because he whistled all night. Every
one thought that he never slept, for he whistled all the time,
whistled without stopping from evening till daylight. Hohwitina
watched the three girls a good many nights; he never looked after
them during daylight, for he rested at that time. They were brought to
him at dusk every evening to the central pillar of the sweat-house.
The arms of each girl were tied together; one girl was tied to
Hohwitina's left arm, the second to his right arm, and the third
behind to his waist.

After a time old Hwipajusi sent ten of the best southern men to bring
back his three daughters; the names of these men were Pusi Tena, Wija
Lala, Chami Nuri, Malwila, Gowila, Grana Rana, Dekkech, Pushi Chowa,
Manu Rana, Taki Lapiki. These men were called Yolaina,--that is, the
bravest, men who feared nothing.

These men painted their arms and faces black before starting, took
good bows and arrows, and went to Wahkalu.

Hwipajusi had kept his three daughters always hidden away in his
sweat-house, rolled up in otter-skin carefully; but Haka Kaina, the
chief of Wahkalu, had stolen in while all were sleeping and carried
away the three maidens.

Hwipajusi's ten men came near Wahkalu one evening between dusk and
darkness, and were right there near the sweat-house. Haka Kaina, the
chief, saw them coming, and prepared all his forces to fight.

"These are people," said he, "sent by Hwipajusi, very brave and strong
men. You must not let them come near the three girls; you must not let
them go from here; you must not let them take the girls nor go away
themselves; you must kill these ten enemies."

One of the Haka Kaina's men had a great hammer. He put a block of
flint at the point which the ten men attacked when they came near; he
struck the flint with his hammer; small sharp bits flew off from it
like rain, fell on the attackers, and cut them terribly. The ten men
had no fear of flint nor of other things. They rushed on until five
were killed; the five others were not frightened and they went
forward. The man with the hammer struck away on the flint block till
five more were killed.

Now Hwipajusi's ten brave men who feared nothing were dead.

Hwipajusi waited for his men to come back, looked for them, hoped to
see them bring his daughters, but the men could not come; they were
dead. They had promised their chief to bring the girls surely, but
they could not bring them; the ten were dead at Wahkalu.

Hwipajusi sent ten other men, men who were very wise and cunning.
These ten were Itchi Watibila, Chini Pachuna, Maibyu, Tsigaga,
Maltama, Howichi Laina, Aichuch Hisipa, Tsawila, Haiyude Maupa, Tarku
Wana. These ten men came near the sweat-house, sat down, and hid there
in the evening.

"I will go up first on the sweat-house," said Maibyu; "you are too
heavy, your tread is heavy. If you go, they will hear you, they will
wake up; we shall be killed, like the ten who came before us."

"I know the man who watches the girls," said Maibyu; "he whistles all
night, but he sleeps; no one in the sweat-house sleeps more soundly
than he does. Now, when he is asleep, I will go down and take the
girls from him."

"I will go myself," said Itchi Watibila.

Haka Kaina's people danced that evening, and played till late at
night. Hwipajusi's ten men crept near and watched the people dancing,
but no one saw them. Haka Kaina sat inside the sweat-house, smoking
and talking, talking loud; the ten heard his voice. At last, when it
was late, all the men went into the sweat-house and other houses, and
in time they were asleep everywhere. All were silent except Hohwitina,
who sat watching the girls at the central pillar; and he whistled all
the time.

The ten went around the sweat-house; saw that all were sleeping. They
heard no noise but the whistling of Hohwitina.

"I know that he is asleep now," said Itchi Watibila.

Four men went to the top of the sweat-house. The watcher was whistling
not so loudly, but whistling. Itchi Watibila gave his arrows to Chini
Pachuna, and Chini Pachuna gave them to Maibyu, for he had to lift up
the girls.

"That man sleeps, I know," said Itchi Watibila; and he went down
slowly along the pillar, reached the bottom, and sat a while to
listen. He looked closely at Hohwitina, and saw that he was whistling
with his eyes shut. Itchi Watibila laughed to himself. He saw that one
girl was tied to each of Hohwitina's arms and one to his waist from
behind. The girls were awake, all three of them.

Itchi Watibila untied the right-hand girl carefully; raised her to
Chini Pachuna, who gave her to Maibyu at the top of the sweat-house.
Hohwitina whistled on, and Itchi Watibila took the left-hand girl,
raised her to the other man; at last he took the third, the youngest
daughter of Hwipajusi, made no noise, raised her to the others, then
climbed up himself, rested a moment on the top of the sweat-house,
looked down. Hohwitina was whistling away and asleep all the time. The
ten slipped down without noise and started home; hurried off toward
the south with Hwipajusi's three daughters.

Old Haka Kaina rose up at daylight, walked around the sweat-house,
went to the central pillar to look at Hohwitina and the three girls he
was guarding. He saw Hohwitina, heard how he was whistling, saw nobody
near him,--no girls tied to his arms or his waist.

"He has let the girls go," thought Haka Kaina. "You whistle all night,
but don't watch," said Haka Kaina, pushing him. He woke him.

Hohwitina looked at his right arm, no girl; looked at his left, the
second was gone; felt at his back, there was no one there.

"Where are the girls?" asked Haka Kaina.

"I cannot tell," said Hohwitina.

Haka Kaina looked around and saw tracks in the ashes.

"You said that you never sleep at night; now look at those tracks;
those are somebody's tracks, somebody came here last night. What were
you doing? Were you awake? were you sleeping? Did you let the girls
go because you were willing, or did somebody take them while you were
sleeping?"

Hohwitina said nothing, held down his head. Haka Kaina went out, and
saw tracks on the sweat-house, then he saw tracks below at some
distance away from the sweat-house.

"People came from the south and took the three girls," said he; "of
course they were sent by Hwipajusi."

Haka Kaina talked all the next night to his people, told how sorry he
was that the girls had been taken, and to two men he said, "You must
go and bring back the girls to us."

The two were Bohkwi and Simu Nupchowa; they could run fast, and were
very wise persons.

Now, on the top of his sweat-house, at the central pillar, Hwipajusi
had posted Matsklila as a sentry, and he watched carefully to see who
would come. Hwipajusi knew that Haka Kaina would try to get the girls
back again. Matsklila had a knife in his nose and one in each arm.

Bohkwi and Simu Nupchowa set out to bring the girls back from the
south. Just at sunset one evening they came near the village; they saw
crowds of people everywhere, young men and women at play in the great
village.

Old Hwipajusi sat talking; and a great many people, old and young, men
and women, sat around him and listened. Haka Kaina's two men went near
the sweat-house.

"I am going in," said Bohkwi.

"No, I am going," said Simu Nupchowa. "You cannot run fast. You stand
near, and when I come out you run ahead, and I can carry the three
girls easily. I will catch up with you."

The people sat there near the sweat-house and listened to the chief as
he talked. "Be on the watch; they will come to-night, they will come,
I am sure," said Hwipajusi.

After a time all separated, went to their houses, and lay down to
sleep. At midnight, when all was silent, Haka Kaina's two men crept up
and climbed the sweat-house to look in at the top. Matsklila was at
his post behind the central pillar, standing still. Haka Kaina's men
did not see him.

"I will look in," said Bohkwi.

"So will I," said Simu Nupchowa.

They stretched their heads and looked. They leaned over the opening,
stretched their necks far. That moment Matsklila moved quickly, and
both their heads dropped off, rolled down, and fell to the earth
outside the sweat-house.

When Hwipajusi rose up in the morning, he went outside and saw two
heads lying near the sweat-house.

"Wake up, jump up, my sons," cried he, calling to the people; "enemies
were here last night."

All hurried out and saw two bodies and two heads. One asked, "Who is
this lying dead?" A second asked, "Who is the other man?"

"I know them both," said Hwipajusi. "One is Bohkwi, the other Simu
Nupchowa, two great men in Haka Kaina's forces."

The two lay there behind the sweat-house all the day. That evening
Hwipajusi summoned in his people, and talked to them. "Fix your arrows
well, look at your bows, and have all your arms ready. Haka Kaina will
send men here against us; he wants to steal my daughters again, or
take them away in spite of me."

They waited at Wahkalu for Bohkwi and Simu Nupchowa. When the two men
did not come, old Haka Kaina said, "I think those two men are dead."

He called all his people together and said: "We must go down and make
war on Hwipajusi; there is no other way. He stole those three girls
from me. Those three girls are mine. I must have them back again."

All dressed next morning, put on their feathers, blackened their
faces.

"Now, my men," said Haka Kaina; "arm, stand out on a broad place, let
me see you, then stand in a circle round the sweat-house. I want to
see how you look when all together."

They went out and stood together on a broad place. Haka Kaina was a
long time going among them. After that all came back and stood in a
circle around the whole sweat-house. All shouted and sprang about a
good while; then they went back, took off their big elkskin armor.

"You look well," said Haka Kaina. "You are ready for war, and we will
start to-morrow early."

Next morning the women painted their faces, put on feathers and beads,
danced behind the men, sang, and said good words to them at parting.
As the men marched along southward, there were so many that the dust
which rose from them went up to the sun. They went forward singing.
Haka Kaina himself sang as he led this great army. When near
Hwipajusi's country, Haka Kaina sent Pokil Kama, Gaman Atpa,
Pahninopa, and Tsanu Noipa to examine everything and bring back news.

These four men saw many villages belonging to different people, and
visited four of them. They went to the villages of Pareko, Chapilkeya,
Chil Wareko, and Chil Dayauna. They saw a great many people at these
four villages; each chief had an immense sweat-house, and Chil
Dayauna's people had elkskin armor to fight in.

The four men went back about dusk and had not seen all that there was
to see. They said to Haka Kaina, "We saw a great many people; you must
be careful; our people must fight well."

Haka Kaina's men sharpened their arrow-points.

Two Tsoplaina boys went with Haka Kaina. The chief was very fond of
these boys, and they liked him. They heard what the four scouts had
said, and at dusk these two boys went to Hwipajusi's and saw the three
girls playing around the fire.

"Look, look at the mouse," said one of the girls.

"That is a mouse coming after you," said Hwipajusi, laughing.

"Where are the two brothers?" asked Haka Kaina, when he missed the
Tsoplaina boys. No one had sent these young men to Hwipajusi's.

Now, the Tsoplaina brothers worked hard, worked all night. They went
through more than half the houses, and destroyed a great many
bow-strings. At daylight they went back and told Haka Kaina what they
had done.

Hwipajusi's people saw Haka Kaina's great army coming; they ran for
their bows, but many were destroyed. Those who had bows left fought
well. But Haka Kaina's men had arms of flint and arms of all kinds,
and they beat down everything before them. At midday Hwipajusi's
people were destroyed and he himself was killed.

Haka Kaina took the three girls and set out for Wahkalu again, taking
everything that Hwipajusi and his people had. Now there were two
brothers, Mini Auna, who lived with their sisters at Wamarawi, near a
trail which Haka Kaina had not used before, but he started home on it
this time.

When Haka Kaina's forces came in sight of Wamarawi, the two sisters
were out husking acorns. They were frightened and ran home. One of
them ran to her brothers and cried,--

"Come, brothers, hurry out and look. A great many people are coming. I
do not know where they come from nor where they are going. Perhaps
they will kill us."

Each of Haka Kaina's men had a great pack on his back holding all that
he could carry. They were taking home everything from Hwipajusi's
village.

The two Mini Auna brothers ran quickly to their sweat-house; each of
them caught up a great piece of fire. The two sisters ran into the
sweat-house and hid there. The two brothers went to the top of the
sweat-house, and when Haka Kaina's great army was near enough, they
hurled fire around it, north, south, east, and west. All were
surrounded. They looked to every side, tried to get out, but there was
no escape anywhere. The great fire closed in around them, and every
man perished. All were burned to death. Hwipajusi's three daughters
died with the others. As soon as all were dead, the fire went out and
disappeared; the two brothers went back into their sweat-house.

When the Mini Aunas were going to hurl the fire, Haka Kaina sent two
swift runners to Wahkalu to let his women know that all were coming
with great plunder, and bringing Hwipajusi's daughters. Sooner than
these men were out of sight the fire was around the whole army, which
perished before the eyes of the two swift runners.

When the swift runners reached Wahkalu, all the women were dancing;
they thought that their husbands were fighting yet against Hwipajusi.
When the swift runners were coming near, the women stopped dancing,
and when both came up and said that Haka Kaina and his army were dead
at Wamarawi, burned by the Mini Aunas, the women raised a cry of
sorrow such as no one had ever heard in Wahkalu before. Soon some
women said,--

"We must go down to Wamarawi, we must go a good many of us, and beg
the two brothers to bring our men to life again."

They took beautiful presents, shells and otter-skins, put them on
their backs, and started; went without waiting, travelled all night,
travelled quickly. They were at Wamarawi next morning. They went to
the two brothers, gave them presents, begged them to bring their
husbands to life again.

The brothers were willing at last to do this.

There was a great spring near their sweat-house, a spring as large as
a lake of good size, and the brothers told the women from Wahkalu and
their own two sisters to carry the bones to that water.

The Wahkalu women and the two sisters took baskets, carried bones all
that day, and put them in the spring. At sunset the field was clear
and all the bones were in the water.

"Now," said the brothers to the women from Wahkalu, "you must camp far
away from the spring, and not go near it till broad daylight
to-morrow; and our sisters you must not rise up to-night to go out of
the sweat-house."

The two brothers closed the top of the sweat-house and did not sleep
themselves.

About daylight they heard talking at the spring, then more talking,
and later a great sound of voices. At broad daylight all had come out
of the spring, and all the place around was full of people, crowds of
people everywhere.

The two brothers looked from the top of the sweat-house, saw all Haka
Kaina's army standing there strong and well. Each man had his pack
with its treasures, the plunder brought from Hwipajusi's village; each
had on his war-dress and feathers. Hwipajusi's three daughters were
there, too, as well as ever.

Haka Kaina went to the house of the Mini Aunas and talked to the
brothers. He gave them otter-skins, beads, elkskins. He was grateful
and very kind; called them cousins. After that he went home with his
army and women. All those left at Wahkalu came out to meet the men,
went far, danced, danced because all had come to life again and
because the three girls were brought back.

The men put away their bows, arrows, and elkskins; all washed the
paint from their faces.

"Now give us plenty to eat," said Haka Kaina.

They went into the sweat-house; all ate and talked till midnight. At
midnight each went to his own place and rested.




TITINDI MAUPA AND PAIOWA, THE YOUNGEST DAUGHTER OF WAKARA


PERSONAGES

After each name is given that of the creature or thing into which the
personage was changed subsequently.

=Hemauna Márimi=, ----; =Hitchinna=, wildcat; =Lawalila=, chicken
hawk; =Paiowa=, new moon's youngest daughter; =Titildi Marimi=, black
bear woman; =Titindi Maupa=, her brother; =Topuna=, mountain lion;
=Tuina=, the sun; =Wakara=, new moon.

       *       *       *       *       *

Titindi Maupa lived at a place called Kurulsa Mauna, where he had two
sisters. Three miles west of that place lived young Topuna with his
father, who had a great sweat-house at Motiri Mauna.

Titindi Maupa wished his elder sister to marry Topuna, his great
friend, who was a good hunter and killed many deer. One day Titindi
Maupa told his two sisters to make ready much food,--roots, acorns,
and pine nuts.

The women made these things ready and put them into a round basket. He
put the basket on his back, took two otter-skins as presents, and went
to Motiri Mauna.

Old Topuna was sitting at home. His son had gone off before daylight
to hunt deer in the mountains. Titindi Maupa saw a great deal of
venison and deer fat hanging around in all parts of the sweat-house.

He looked in from the top of the sweat-house, and saw the old man
cutting meat, breaking bones, and taking marrow out of them. He went
in. Topuna stood up to meet him, made a fire, cooked meat, put it in a
basket, and set it down before Titindi Maupa. He gave him also fat and
dried venison.

"I have food on the top of the sweat-house," said Titindi Maupa. "I
left my basket there."

Topuna went and brought it, put it down, then ate of it himself. The
visitor ate much, and the two sat long together talking and eating;
sat till midday, when young Topuna came home. He had killed five deer
and was glad.

"You came to see us," said he, sitting down near the visitor.

"Yes," answered Titindi Maupa, "and you will come soon, I hope, to my
house. You will come to-night, perhaps?"

Topuna gave Titindi Maupa nice venison and deer fat,--a great deal of
it. "Be light and small till he takes you home," said Topuna to the
meat; "then be as big as you now are or bigger."

He gave the visitor a beautiful buckskin dress, and Titindi Maupa went
home.

The pack was light till he set it down at home. Then it grew as big as
a small house. His elder sister would not eat Topuna's venison; she
did not like her brother's friend; she loved young Hitchinna, and
would not look at the other man.

Topuna put on three pairs of moccasins, three pairs of thick buckskin
leggings trimmed with beads; put on three buckskin blankets, and at
dark he went out of the door to go to Kurulsa Mauna.

"My son," said old Topuna, when his son was going, "you will come back
sorry; you will be angry in the morning; I know that woman well."

All were asleep at Titindi Maupa's when Topuna came; but Titildi
Marimi had wished the whole house outside to be covered with sharp
rocks and thorny brush, for she knew that Topuna was coming.

When he reached the place, he could not go in; he could not find the
door, even; everything was hidden with sharp rocks and thorns. He was
outside all night, and never stopped trying to find the way in; he
wore out his three pair of moccasins, tore his three pair of leggings
and three blankets; bits of them were scattered all around the
sweat-house. At last he was naked and nearly frozen.

Topuna went home before daylight, very angry. Titildi Marimi had heard
him, but said not a word. He lay down in his father's sweat-house and
stayed there all day.

When daylight came, Titildi Marimi rose up and went out of the
sweat-house; the rocks and brush were all gone at her wish; nothing
there now but the nice beads that had fallen from Topuna. She went to
the spring; washed there, combed and dressed her hair, painted her
face red, put on a nice woven cap, took a little basket with a sharp
stick, and went out on the mountain; went far; dug sweet roots by the
creeks on the mountain flats.

Titindi Maupa was angry at his sister all day; he stayed in bed until
evening. Titildi Marimi dug roots, dug a great many, singing all the
time while she worked. Hitchinna heard the singing from his place and
came to her. She liked him. She went to meet him; was pleased to see
him; they sat down together, talked, and were glad. They parted for
that day; he hunted deer, she filled her basket with roots and went
home about sundown.

Titindi Maupa was in bed yet. He did not raise his eyes when she came;
did not look at his sister.

Next morning she rose early; rose at daylight. She had promised
Hitchinna to meet him a second time. She washed, combed her hair,
painted her face, took a basket with a root stick, and started.

She had not gone far when her brother sprang up, hurried to the river,
swam in it; went back to the sweat-house, striking his hair as he went
with a stick to make it dry quickly. Then he ate, and said to his
younger sister,--

"I am going away; I must leave you; you will cry, I think, because I
am going."

He put on rich clothes, then tied a string of nice beads to a staff,
and fastened the staff in one corner of the house corners.

"If I die," said he, "those beads will fall to the ground; do not
touch them while they are hanging, and say to our sister not to touch
them. When she comes, do not say that I have gone; if she knows
herself, you must not show her the way that I have taken."

Then he turned to each thing in the house and said, "You, my
poking-stick, must not tell my sister how I have gone, nor you, my
baskets, nor you, my fire, nor you, my basket of water, nor my roots;
not one of you must tell her." And he told everything except the acorn
flour; he forgot to tell the acorn flour.

"Now I go," said he; and pushing up the central post of the house, he
went in to the ground, and the post settled back after him. He went
under ground until he reached a spring of water. From the spring he
turned back and went west, then back; went north, then back; went
south, then back to the spring. Next he went in circles around his
house to mislead his sister, so that she might not track him. At last
he went west two or three miles; then he rose to the top of the
ground, and went off on a trail.

When she went to the mountain flat on the second morning, Titildi
Marimi stood a while thinking. She knew that her brother was out of
bed, that he was very angry. "My brother will go away to-day," thought
she. "I must be home again soon."

She threw down her stick and basket quickly and hurried home. She saw
that her brother was not in the house, that her sister was crying.

"Where is my brother," asked she; "tell me, my sister."

The sister would not speak, gave no answer; held down her head and
cried bitterly.

"Tell me quickly. The sun is high. If I cannot come up with him, he
will die; if I do not find him, his enemies will kill him." The sister
did not answer.

"Tell me, you rock, which way my brother went; tell me quickly. Tell
me, you poking-stick; tell me, baskets." Nothing gave answer. "Post,
tell me, tell quickly; it is too late almost, he will escape me." She
asked everything and got no answer, till at last she said, "Acorn
flour, will you tell me?"

"Your brother is gone," said the acorn flour. "He is angry because you
injured Topuna, his friend; he is very angry, and does not wish you to
follow him."

"Which way did he go?"

"Under the post."

"That is well."

She was glad then. She made ready quickly; put on nice, new things,
took her best bow and a big otter-skin quiver filled with arrows, put
on leggings like a man.

"My sister, be well, take good care of yourself," said she. "I don't
want my brother to die. He thinks that the journey is pleasant, that
the journey is easy. I will go, too; I will help him."

She pushed up the post and followed her brother; went to the spring,
came back, followed him everywhere; came out at last on the trail and
tracked him, followed him, toiled along over Backbone Mountain. She
followed hard and fast, gained on him, kept gaining; still she was
afraid that she could not come up with her brother. She turned then to
Sun and called out,--

"O Sun, I wish you to be slow. Go very slowly to-day, O Sun. Let the
day be long. Give me time to come up with my brother."

The Sun went more slowly, gave her time, and she hurried on.

Titindi Maupa all this while was hurrying, going on quickly; and he
sang as he went. His song was of Paiowa, Wakara's youngest daughter, a
maiden far off in the west.

Wakara had a great many daughters. All the stars in the sky were his
children, and all his daughters were married but this one, the
youngest, the one whom Titindi Maupa was going to marry if her father
would give her.

He went along the Daha, went as the stream flows, swam across and sat
down to smoke. When he had emptied his pipe, he went up on the
mountain ridge west of the river, reached the top, and walked some
distance down on the western slope, sat again and smoked a second
time. Now Titildi Marimi, his sister, had crossed the river and was
following. She came to where her brother had sat to smoke the first
time.

"I will come up with you soon," said she. "You cannot go from me now;"
and she followed on, followed quickly.

The brother, when he smoked the second time, sat at a little spring on
the western slope of the mountain ridge; the sister reached the ridge
from the top; she saw her brother a little below her. He heard some
one behind, looked up, and saw Titildi Marimi. He held his head down,
he said nothing.

"I shall be with you soon," cried the sister. "We can go on together.
You have come a long way to find a good smoking-place."

He said nothing, looked at the ground, waited for his sister. Soon
she was there with him.

"My brother, I am tired," said she, "give me tobacco; I wish to
smoke."

He gave her tobacco; she smoked.

"My brother," said Titildi Marimi, "I want you to shoot at that quartz
rock over there on the mountain side."

He raised his bow with an arrow and took good aim.

"Now hit that rock," said she.

He sent one arrow, after it a second, and then a third. They hit the
rock, but bounded back from it.

"You might go a long way to hurt an enemy with arrows of that sort!"
laughed the sister. "Do you think those good arrows, my brother? You
will see enemies enough in two days; you will see enemies in the house
of Wakara."

She drew out her own bow then, took an arrow from her otter-skin
quiver, and said, "Look now at me, my brother!"

She shot at the rock; hit it. Her arrow shivered the rock to pieces.

"This is what my arrows do!" said Titildi Marimi.

Titindi Maupa hung his head; said not a word, but rose and went down
the mountain side till he came to a creek; then he crossed another
mountain, going westward all the time till he was in sight of
Wakaruwa, the place to which he was going; then he sat down a third
time and smoked.

"O smoke," said he, "I wish you to make friends to-night and
to-morrow for me."

He looked down into the valley, where he heard much noise; he saw many
people playing games and shooting.

Just before this Wakara had called his youngest daughter, Paiowa, and
said, "I want you to gather oak leaves for the acorn bread, and red
earth to mix in it."

She went with a basket on her back, went up to the mountain side,
gathered red earth to mix with the acorn flour and make the bread
light. The leaves were to be put on the top of the dough and cover the
bread while baking. Titindi Maupa put his sister with her quiver in an
otter-skin and carried her. She had made herself small, and seemed
just like an otter; he hid her on his shoulder in this form.

Paiowa, Wakara's youngest daughter, had put red earth in her basket
and filled it with leaves. She turned around now to stoop and raise
it, but could not, it was too heavy.

Titindi Maupa had slipped up and was holding the basket. She turned to
see what the trouble was, and saw him right there almost touching her.

"Oh!" cried she, frightened and dropping her head; she was shamefaced
before the stranger.

"Why are you afraid?" asked Titindi Maupa. "Is it because I am ugly?"

She raised the basket to her back, and rushed away. When she reached
Wakaruwa, she threw down the basket outside, and ran into the house
past her mother.

"Why are you so frightened? What is the matter?" asked her mother.

Not a word did she answer.

Old Wakara was sitting inside. "Why are you frightened, my daughter?"
asked he. "Has anything happened, has any one hurt you?"

"I saw a man over there on the mountain."

"What kind of man was he?" asked Wakara.

"He has an otter on his back and wears buckskin; his hands are both
red with deer blood."

Titindi Maupa had a large piece of fat venison in his otter-skin
quiver.

"He is a good hunter, I think," said Wakara; and he took down an
otter-skin, put it on the north side of the house, and said to his
daughter, "Sit there and let this man come to you."

It was night soon. All the people came into the house, sat down, and
ate supper. Titindi Maupa stopped outside for a while, and found a
place where Wakara stored acorns. "I will leave you here for this
night," said he to his sister. "To-morrow I will come to get you."

Titindi Maupa left his sister in the acorn crib, sank in the ground
then, and came up inside the sweat-house right at the side of Paiowa.
Old Wakara laughed when he saw him sitting near his daughter. He was
glad.

"Give the stranger food," said he.

Paiowa brought food and gave it to the stranger.

Titindi Maupa ate some and said, "Look in my otter-skin, I have some
venison."

She put her hand in, found a good piece, a nice saddle of venison.
She could not draw the piece out, it was so heavy. She went then to
her father and said, "I must have a big basket."

She took a large tray basket over to her place. Titindi Maupa drew out
the venison and put it on the tray, saying,--

"Now, be no smaller, my venison, stay as you are, no matter how much
they take from you."

Two girls carried the basket and put it down before Wakara and Hemauna
Marimi, his wife. The two old people ate. After them all in the house
ate, and the saddle of venison was as large as at first. When all in
the house had eaten, old Wakara went out on the housetop and
shouted,--

"My sons, I call you all to come in for a short while."

Now, all the stars in the sky were Wakara's children; they were his
sons and daughters. The greatest, a son, came in first. When near the
house, he had caught the odor of venison. Behind him came a great many
people. All the stars were in Wakara's sweat-house; the whole place
was filled with them. When they looked and saw Titindi Maupa sitting
with their sister, they laughed. They were glad. Some sat down; others
cut off the venison and roasted it. All ate what they wanted.

Now, old Wakara himself cut off venison, and gave a large share to
each son to carry home for his wife and children. All went away
laughing.

Titindi Maupa rose before dawn the next morning, took a deer head, and
went hunting to a mountain. He put on the head. Deer came and stood
before him, ten, then ten more, and soon there were a hundred. He
killed the hundred deer. Taking the smallest, he opened it, made the
others very little, and put them into the small one, which he carried
in one hand.

All were sleeping in the sweat-house when Titindi Maupa came. He threw
down the small deer, and the ninety-nine others were as big as at
first; they burst out of the small one, made a great noise, and filled
all the space before the sweat-house. Wakara's wife had got up to make
acorn bread. She tried to go out, but could not, there were so many
deer lying around everywhere. She hurried back and called her husband.

"There is something outside," said she; "I do not know what it is. Get
up and look, get up quickly!"

Wakara went out and saw piles of deer; he ran back, took his knife and
sharpened it. Then going to the top of the house, he called to the
whole village, "Come here; come, all of you!"

All the people of the village came soon, and there were so many that
the venison was dressed quickly. They cooked and ate in company.
Others came from beyond the river south of them, and ate all the
venison they wanted. Many sat down under oak-trees and gambled; some
shot arrows at marks, and others raced.

All day they amused themselves; all day they feasted, and went home at
sunset very glad and praising Titindi Maupa.

West of Wakaruwa, was a large village and many people, all Wakara's
sons-in-law, all married to his daughters; and the chief was Lawalila.

"I wonder what my father-in-law is doing," said each of these people;
"he has very loud talk in his sweat-house. There has never been such
talk there before."

Lawalila called his two sons and said: "Go and see what your
grandfather is doing. Your youngest aunt has a husband; perhaps that
is why there is such loud talk at the sweat-house."

The two boys stole up to the house carefully, and peeped into it. The
younger saw Paiowa, his aunt, in one corner, and Titindi Maupa sitting
near her. Wakara saw the boy peeping in, and hurled a stick at him.
The two boys ran home.

"My aunt has a husband," said the younger boy.

"She has not," said the elder.

"I saw him," said the younger.

"You did not," said the elder.

Lawalila stopped the boys; he was satisfied. He went out, and calling
to all said, "Paiowa, the youngest daughter of Wakara, is married!"

All were very angry now, all were enraged, for there were many in that
village who wanted Paiowa.

Next morning Lawalila roused the village early, and said: "I want you,
my people, to play to-day. You must play your best; you must beat
Titindi Maupa, Wakara's new son-in-law."

After they had eaten he called all his people together and said, "We
will go over to my father-in-law's, to Wakara's, and shoot at a mark
there with arrows."

They went to Wakara's and asked: "Where is Titindi Maupa? We wish to
try him; we want to shoot arrows at a mark against him."

Titindi Maupa came out and shot. He won the first shot, the second; he
won all the time, won everything that Lawalila's people wagered.

Just at noon Lawalila lost his temper, got angry, sprang up, tried to
seize and take back all the things that his people had lost. Titindi
Maupa would not let him do that; he stood in his way, would not let
him take anything.

Lawalila struck Wakara's new son-in-law. Titindi Maupa threw down his
opponent. Lawalila jumped up, ran toward his people, drew his bow, and
tried to send an arrow through Titindi Maupa. A great fight now
followed.

Wakara's sons came and took Titindi Maupa's part. Lawalila's people
hurried to his side. Titindi Maupa's young wife ran out to help her
brothers and her husband.

They fought very hard on both sides. In the middle of the afternoon
all were killed on Lawalila's side except himself. New forces came to
Lawalila. Titindi Maupa was so tired that he could not stand. At this
moment his sister came. She picked up Titindi Maupa, put him on her
back, and gave him her bow and arrows. He shot from her shoulder, and
used her strong arrows. Every man that they touched fell that moment.
Every one from the west was killed, Lawalila with the others.

Titindi Maupa rested, and went to the sweat-house. His sister went
with him. The dead of both sides lay all night where they fell.

Before daybreak Titindi Maupa rose, took his fire-drill, went out, and
turning the faces of all his brothers-in-law to the earth, struck them
with the fire-drill. All came to life and went back to Wakaruwa.

Lawalila's people lay on the field all night, the next day, and the
night following. Titindi Maupa did not like to see all those dead
people lying there; so he went before daybreak of the second day and
struck each with his fire-drill. All came to life, rose up, were glad,
and went home. Next morning they came to Wakaruwa, and had games
again, with good feasting and pleasure. They did not get angry a
second time.

Titindi Maupa brought in deer every morning. His brothers-in-law came
and ate with him; they were friendly and happy. Titindi Maupa stayed
twenty days at Wakaruwa. He killed deer for all of them. On the
twenty-first morning Wakara said to his daughter,--

"I think your husband would like to go home now."

Next morning Titindi Maupa set out for home with his wife and sister;
they went in one day to Kurulsa Mauna.

Three nights later Topuna came to visit them; he came again to see
Titildi Marimi. She let him come now. She was afraid that her brother
might leave her a second time.

So at last Topuna got the wife he wanted, and they all lived together
at Kurulsa Mauna.




THE TWO SISTERS, HAKA LASI AND TSORE JOWA


PERSONAGES

After each name is given that of the creature or thing into which the
personage was changed subsequently.

=Chuhna=, spider; =Haka hasi=, loon; =Hitchinna=, wildcat; =Jamuka=,
acorn worm; =Juka=, silkworm; =Metsi=, coyote; =Tsanunewa=, fisher (a
bird); =Tsore Jowa=, eagle.

       *       *       *       *       *

At some distance east of Jigul matu lived old Juka. He had a great
many sons and two daughters--a big house full of children.

Juka's two daughters were Tsore Jowa, the elder, and Haka Lasi, the
younger. After a time Haka Lasi fell in love with her brother
Hitchinna. One day she fell asleep and dreamed that he had married
her.

Metsi lived, too, in Juka's house. He was no relative; he just lived
as a guest there.

One day all the men were out hunting. It was then that Haka Lasi saw
Hitchinna in a dream. She began to sing about him, and she sang: "I
dream of Hitchinna; I dream that he is my husband. I dream of
Hitchinna; I dream that he is my husband."

All the men came back from the hunt at night. At daylight next morning
they went to swim, and Tsore Jowa made ready food for them. Haka Lasi
took a very nice staff in her hand, and went on top of the
sweat-house. She looked in and sang,--

"Where is my husband? Send him up here to me. I will take him away. We
must go on a journey. Where is my husband? Send him up here to me."

All knew that she had no husband.

"You have no husband," said they.

Hitchinna was lying in one corner wrapped up in the skin of a wildcat.

"You have no husband in this house; all here are your brothers," said
Juka.

"I have a husband, and I want him to come here to me," answered Haka
Lasi.

"Well," said the eldest son, "I will go up to her. Let us hear what
she will say." He went up.

"You are not my husband," said Haka Lasi. "Do not come near me."

She drove that one down, and called again: "Where is my husband? Send
him up to me."

"Go you," said Juka to the second son.

"I don't want you," said Haka Lasi to the second son.

She refused one after another, and drove them away until none was left
but Hitchinna. Juka went then to Hitchinna and said,--

"My son, get up and go to her; it looks as though you were the one she
wants."

"He is the one," said Haka Lasi; "he is my husband. I want him to go
away with me."

Hitchinna said not a word, but rose, washed, dressed himself nicely,
and went to the woman.

"The sun is high now," said Haka Lasi; "we must go quickly."

She was glad when taking away the one she wanted. They travelled
along, and she sang of Hitchinna as they travelled, sang of him all
the time. They went a long distance, and at night she fixed a bed and
they lay down on it.

Young Hitchinna could not sleep, he was frightened. When Haka Lasi was
asleep, he rose very quickly, took a piece of soft rotten wood, put it
on her arm where she had held his head, covered it, and then ran away
quickly, hurried back toward Juka's sweat-house with all his might.
About daylight he was at the sweat-house.

Now Chuhna, Juka's sister, lived with him. She was the greatest person
in the world to spin threads and twist ropes. She had a willow basket
as big as a house, and a rope which reached up to the sky and was
fastened there.

"My nephew," said she to Hitchinna, "I will save you and save all from
your terrible sister. She will be here very soon; she may come any
moment. She will kill all in this house; she will kill every one if
she finds us here. Let all go into my basket. I will take you up to
the sky. She cannot find us there; she cannot follow us to that
place."

"I will lie lowest," said Metsi. "I am a good man, I will go in first,
I will go in before others; I will be at the bottom of the basket."

Metsi went in first; every one in the sweat-house followed him. Then
Chuhna ran up, rose on her rope, and pulled the basket after her.

The sweat-house was empty; no one stayed behind. Chuhna kept rising
and rising, going higher and higher.

When Haka Lasi woke up and saw that she had a block of rotten wood on
her arm instead of Hitchinna, she said,--

"You won't get away from me, I will catch you wherever you are."

She rushed back to the sweat-house. It was empty; no one there. She
ran around in every direction looking for tracks, to find which way
they had gone. She found nothing on the ground; then she looked into
the sky, and far up, very high, close to the sun, she saw the basket
rising, going up steadily.

Haka Lasi was raging; she was so awfully angry that she set fire to
the house. It burned quickly, was soon a heap of coals.

The basket was almost at the sky when Metsi said to himself, "I wonder
how far up we are; I want to see." And he made a little hole in the
bottom of the basket to peep through and look down.

That instant the basket burst open; all came out, poured down, a great
stream of people, and all fell straight into the fire of the
sweat-house.

Now, Tsore Jowa was outside on top of the basket. She caught at the
sun, held to it, and saved herself.

Hitchinna went down with the rest, fell into the burning coals, and
was burned like his brothers.

Haka Lasi was glad that they had not escaped her; she took a stick,
fixed a net on it, and watched.

All were in the fire now and were burning. After a while one body
burst, and the heart flew out of it. Haka Lasi caught this heart in
her net. Soon a second and a third body burst, and two more hearts
flew out. She caught those as well as the first one. She caught all
the hearts except two,--Juka's own heart and his eldest son's heart.

Juka's heart flew high, went away far in the sky, and came down on the
island of a river near Klamath Lake. It turned into Juka himself
there. He sank in the ground to his chin; only his head was sticking
out.

The heart of the eldest son flew off to the foot of Wahkalu and turned
to be himself again. He fell so deep into the earth that only his face
was sticking out on the surface.

Now Haka Lasi put all the hearts which she had caught on a string,
hung them around her neck, and went to a lake east of Jigulmatu. She
wanted to live at the bottom of the lake, but could not find a place
deep enough. So she went northwest of Klamath Lake to Crater Lake,
where she could live in deep water.

Two Tsanunewa brothers lived near the lake with their old grandmother.
One morning early these brothers were out catching ducks, and just at
daybreak they heard some one call.

"Who is that?" asked the elder brother.

"I don't know," answered the younger.

Soon they saw Haka Lasi spring up on the water and call. She had a
large string of hearts around her neck. Then she sank again in the
water. Again she came up at some distance and called a second time.

Now Tsore Jowa came down from the sun and went to the old sweat-house,
where she found nothing but a heap of bones and ashes. Putting pitch
on her head and on her arms, and strips of deerskin around her neck
with pitch on them, she cried and went around mourning. After a time
she began to look for her sister. She went everywhere; went to Klamath
Lake.

For some time the two Tsanunewa brothers had heard a voice singing,--

    "Li-wa-éh, li-wa-há,
    Li-wa-éh, li-wa-há."

This was old Juka. He was lying in the ground where he had fallen, and
was crying.

Tsore Jowa searched, inquired, asked every one about Haka Lasi, and
told what she had done,--that she had killed her own brothers and
father.

Tsore Jowa came at last to the house of the two Tsanunewa brothers one
day about sunset, and spoke to their grandmother. "My sister, Haka
Lasi, has killed all my brothers and my father," said she; and she
told the whole story.

The old woman cried when she heard what Tsore Jowa told her. The two
brothers were away hunting; they came home about dark with a large
string of ducks. "This woman," said the grandmother, "is looking for
her sister, who has killed all her people."

The two brothers cried when the story was told to them. When they had
finished crying, they said to the old woman, "Cook ducks and let this
woman have plenty to eat."

When all had eaten, the two brothers said to Tsore Jowa: "Tell us what
kind of a person your sister is. Which way did she go?"

"I don't know which way she went," said Tsore Jowa.

"Three days ago," said the elder brother, "just as daylight was
coming, we saw a woman jump up in the lake where we were fishing. She
seemed to have large beads around her neck. That woman may be your
sister."

"Catch that woman for me. I will give you otter-skins and beads. I
will give bearskins. If you wish, I will stay with you here, if you
catch her."

"We want no beads nor otter-skins nor bearskins," said the brothers.

"What do you want?"

"We want red deer-bones and green deer-bones; small, sharp ones to
stab fish with."

"You shall have all you want of both kinds," said Tsore Jowa.

Next morning she set out with a sack, went away to high mountains,
gathered deer-bones, red and green leg-bones, and put them in her
sack. At sunset she went back to the house, with the sack full.

The two brothers were glad, now. The elder took red, and the younger
green bones. (The fat on the leg-bones of deer turns some red and
others green.)

"You must catch her bad sister for Tsore Jowa," said the old woman to
her grandsons.

All that night the brothers sat sharpening the bones and then
fastening them to the spear-shafts. They did not stop for a moment.
"Let us go now; it is near daylight," said the elder brother.

They started. When they reached the lake, they went out on the water.
Every morning at daybreak. Haka Lasi sprang up to the surface and
called from the lake. The elder brother took a stem of tule grass,
opened it, placed it on the water, made himself small, and sat down in
the middle of it. The younger brother fixed himself in another stem of
tule in the same way. The two tule stems floated away on the water,
till they came near the place where the brothers had seen Haka Lasi
spring up the first time.

"Let me shoot before you," said the elder brother.

"Oh, you cannot shoot; you will miss her," said the younger. "Let me
shoot first. You will miss; you will not hit her heart."

"I will hit," said the elder.

They watched and watched. Each had his bow drawn ready to shoot.
Daylight came now. Haka Lasi rose quickly, came to the top of the
water, and held out her arms before calling.

The younger brother sent the first arrow, struck her in the neck; the
elder shot, struck her right under the arm. Haka Lasi dropped back and
sank in the water.

The brothers watched and watched. After a time they saw two arrows
floating, and were afraid they had lost her. She had pulled them out
of her body, and they rose to the surface. After a while the body
rose. Haka Lasi was dead.

The brothers saw that she had a great many hearts on a string around
her neck. They drew her to the shore then, and carried her home. They
left the body hidden outside the house, and went in.

"We did not see her," said the elder Tsanunewa to his grandmother.

All sat down to eat fish, and when they were through eating, the elder
said to Tsore Jowa, "Come out and see what we caught this morning."

She ran out with them, and saw her dead sister with a string of hearts
on her neck. Tsore Jowa took off her buckskin skirt, wrapped up the
body, and put it in the house. She counted the hearts.

"My eldest brother's heart is not here, and my father's is not here,"
said she.

"Every morning we hear some one crying, far away toward the north;
that may be one of them," said the two Tsanunewas.

Tsore Jowa started out to find this one, if she could, who was
calling. She left the body and hearts at the old grandmother's house,
and hurried off toward the north. She heard the cry soon and knew it.
"That is my father," said she.

Tsore Jowa came near the place from which the cry rose; saw no one.
Still she heard the cry. At last she saw a face; it was the face of
Juka, her father.

Tsore Jowa took a sharp stick and dug. She dug down to Juka's waist;
tried to pull him up, but could not stir him. She dug again, dug a
good while; pulled and pulled, until at last she drew him out.

Juka was very poor, all bones, no flesh at all on him. Tsore Jowa put
down a deerskin, wrapped her father in it, and carried him to the old
woman's house; then she put him with Haka Lasi's body, and carried
them home to the old burned sweat-house east of Jigulmatu.

She was crying yet, since one brother was missing. She put down the
basket in which she had carried them, hid it away, covered it
carefully.

At the foot of Wahkalu lived a certain Jamuka, an old man who had a
wife and two daughters.

"Bring in some wood," said the old man one day to his daughters.

The two girls took their baskets and went to bring wood. Soon they
heard some one singing,--

    "I-nó i-nó, I-no mi-ná
    I-nó, i-nó I-no mi-ná."

"Listen," said the younger sister; "some one is singing."

They listened, heard the singing; it seemed right at the foot of
Wahkalu. They went toward the place from which the sound came.

"That is a nice song," said the younger sister. "I should like to see
the one who sings so."

They went near, saw no one yet. "Let us take the wood home," said the
elder sister, "then come back here; our father may be angry if we stay
away longer."

They took the wood home, put it down, and said nothing. Both went
back to the place where the singing was and listened. At last the
younger sister came to the right place, and said, "I think this is he
who is singing."

There was a head sticking out of the ground, and the face was covered
with water. The man had cried so much that he looked dirty and ugly.

The sisters took sharp sticks, and dug all around the head, dug
deeply. They could not pull out the person; they had only dug to his
waist when night came and they must go.

"Why did you stay out so late?" asked their father.

"We heard some one singing, and wanted to know who it was, but were
not able. We will go back in the morning and search again."

"That is well," said Jamuka. He had heard how Juka's sons had been
killed. "Perhaps one of those people is alive yet," said he; "you must
look for him."

They went early next morning to dig, and drew the man out. They took
off their buckskin skirts then, and wrapped him up carefully. He was
nothing but bones, no flesh at all on his body. The younger sister ran
home to get wildcat skins to wrap around him.

"We have found a man, but he is all bones," said she to her father.

"Take good care of the stranger, feed and nurse him well," said
Jamuka; "he may be Juka himself, and he is a good man."

They wrapped the man in wildcat skins. A great stream of water was
running from his eyes, and deer came down the hill to drink of that
water.

The girls lay on each side of the man, and gave him food; stayed all
night with him. Next morning they went home for more food.

"Feed him, give him plenty," said Jamuka; "he may get health and
strength yet."

The sisters went back and stayed a second night. The man began to look
better, but he cried all the time, and many deer came to drink the
water that flowed from his eyes. The girls went home the second
morning. "The man looks better," said they to their father.

"I have heard," said old Jamuka, "that Juka's sons were killed. This
must be one of them."

They went back right away, and stayed another day and night with the
stranger. The man looked as though he might get his health again. He
began to talk. "Has your father a bow and arrows?" asked he of the
sisters.

"He has; he has many."

"Bring me a bow and arrows; many deer come near me to drink, I may
shoot one."

They took the man's words to their father. Jamuka gave them a bow and
some arrows, and they went back to the sick man.

"You may go home to-night," said he. "I wish to be alone."

The girls left him. At sundown a great buck came and drank of the
tears, he killed him; later another came, he killed that one; at
midnight a third came, he killed the third; now he had three. At
daylight a fourth buck was killed; he had four now. "That is enough,"
thought he.

When the girls came and saw four great bucks lying dead near the
stranger, they were frightened; they ran home and told their father.
Old Jamuka was glad when they told him. He sharpened his knife,
hurried out to the woods and looked at the stranger. "That is Juka's
son," said he; "take good care of him, daughters."

Jamuka dressed the deer, carried them home, and cut up the venison for
drying. Next evening Juka's son sent the girls home a second time, and
killed five great deer that night. Next morning the girls came to see
him, and ran home in wonder.

Their father was very glad. He dressed the five deer as he had the
four, and cut up the venison.

Tsore Jowa was hunting everywhere all this time to find her brother.
She had left the hearts, her sister's body, and her father hidden away
carefully; had done nothing yet to save them.

The night after Juka's son killed the five deer the two girls took him
home to their father. He was well now and beautiful, in good health
and strong. He cried no more after that. A salt spring was formed in
the place where he had fallen and shed so many tears. The spring is in
that place till this day, and deer go in herds to drink from it.
People watch near the spring and kill them, as Juka's son did. Tsore
Jowa went to every house inquiring about her brother. At last she came
to Jamuka's house, and there she found him. She was glad now and
satisfied. She left her brother with his two wives and hurried home.

Tsore Jowa made in one night a great sweat-house, prepared a big
basket, and filled it with water. When the second night came, she
dropped hot stones into the water; put all the hearts into the basket.
Opening her sister's body, she took out her heart and put it in with
the others. At this time the water in the basket was boiling. She
covered the basket and placed it on top of the sweat-house. Then she
went in, lay down and slept.

The water was seething all night. At daybreak the basket turned over,
and there was a crowding and hurrying of people around the
sweat-house. They began to talk briskly.

"We are cold, we are cold!" said they. "Let us in!"

Soon broad daylight came. Tsore Jowa opened the door, and all crowded
into the sweat-house. Tsore Jowa said not a word yet. All the brothers
came; behind them Haka Lasi. She looked well, she was good. Her heart
was clean; there was nothing bad now in it.

"Where is our eldest brother?" asked all.

"He is well; I have found him. He has two wives," said Tsore Jowa.

Juka was in good health and strong. She had washed him and given him
good food.

All were happy, and they went hunting.

"I think your husband would like to go home," said Jamuka one day to
his daughters.

Juka's son and his two wives set out to visit his father; Juka saw
his son coming; took a big blanket quickly, caught him, placed him in
it, and put him right away.

Now the wives of Juka's son came in and sat down in the house. Two
other brothers took them for wives. They stayed a long time, never saw
their first husband again. Old Juka kept him secreted, made him a
Weänmauna, a hidden one.

After a time the two women wished to go home to visit Jamuka. They
took beads and blankets, nice things of all kinds, and went to their
father at the foot of Wahkalu.

"We have never seen our husband," said they, "since we went to his
father's. We have new husbands now."

"I think that is well enough," said Jamuka. "His father has put him
away. His brothers are as good for you as he was."

The sisters agreed with their father, and went back and lived at
Juka's house after that.




THE DREAM OF JUIWAIYU AND HIS JOURNEY TO DAMHAUJA'S COUNTRY


PERSONAGES

After each name is given that of the creature or thing into which the
personage was changed subsequently.

=Damhauja=, the moon just before renewal; =Darijua=, gray squirrel;
=Halaia=, morning star; =Jupka=, butterfly of the wild silk worm;
=Juiwaiyu=, acorn of the Eastern black oak; =Kechowala=, blue jay;
=Mahari=, Eastern black oak; =Pahnino=, a kind of ocean-shell;
=Periwiriwaiyu=, another kind of Eastern black oak.

       *       *       *       *       *

Juiwaiyu lived far away in the east, in the southern part of it. His
father, Periwiriwaiyu, was old. His mother, Maharia, was old, too; but
both were very beautiful.

Juiwaiyu hunted, fished; was happy till one night he dreamed of two
girls who lived beyond Wahkalu, lived north of that mountain.

"I dreamed of two sisters," said he to his father and mother next
morning, "I saw two women last night. They are both very beautiful. I
must find them; I will bring them home if I can."

"You must not go," said his father and mother. "If you go, you will
never come back to this country. We shall not see you again if you
leave us. We know that those people will kill you. We shall never see
you again if you go from here." Then they cried bitterly, both of
them.

But his father and mother could not stop Juiwaiyu; he would go. When
he was ready to start, his mother said,--

"Your uncle lives at Shultsmauna, near Kamshumatu. Stop there. You
must see your uncle, you must talk with him. His name is Jupka. He is
very wise; he will help you. There will be thunder and a sprinkle of
rain here when you touch your uncle's house. I shall know then that
you have got that far in safety."

Juiwaiyu began to sing. He started, and rose through the air. He went
very high, and cried--cried and sang as he travelled. Though he had
made up his mind to go, he feared that his mother's words might come
true, that the people beyond Wahkalu might kill him. He looked far
ahead, and saw smoke near the edge of the sky. "That may be smoke from
my uncle's house," thought Juiwaiyu.

He moved toward the smoke; went on till he was straight above his
uncle's house. He went down to the roof then, and peeped in through
the smoke-hole. The old man, who was lying with his back to the fire,
saw him look in. Jupka stood up, looked again, grabbed his spear.

"Is that the way you look into my house? What do you want here?" cried
Jupka, aiming his spear at the stranger.

"It is I, uncle,--I, Juiwaiyu."

"Why did you not call me uncle when you looked first? Why did you not
say who you were when you came? I might have killed you; I came very
near killing you with my spear. Come down, come down; let me see you,
my nephew."

"I will," said Juiwaiyu; "I have travelled far to-day, I am tired."

He went down on the central pole.

"Uncle, I have come to talk with you, to let you know where I am
going."

"You would better eat first," said Jupka; and he took Juiwaiyu in his
arms, smoothed his hair, and was glad to look at him.

"You are tired, my nephew; you are hungry; you must eat."

"I am not hungry; I have no time to wait; I am in a great hurry."

"Where are you going, my nephew?" asked Jupka.

"I had a dream last night, my uncle; I dreamed of two sisters,
daughters of Damhauja."

"You would better stay at home. My nephew, stay at home; you would
better not go for those sisters. Forget them; don't think of those
girls," said Jupka. "If you go, you will never come back. The place
where they live is a bad one; every stranger gets killed who goes
there. I have seen many men on the way to Damhauja's; many a man has
passed here to look for those sisters, but never have I seen any come
back with or without a woman. I have been in that country myself, I
know it well. I had to fight for my life there, and came near being
killed. I am many times stronger than you, know people better than you
do, and I would not go to that country."

"No matter what kind of country that is, no matter what kind of
people live in it, I must find those two sisters. I have dreamt of
them. There is no use in trying to hold me back. I must go; I cannot
stop, I cannot help myself."

"Well," said Jupka, "if you must go, I will go with you; you would be
lost without me. I must save you, my nephew. I will make myself small;
you can put me on your head, you can tie me up in your hair easily."

The old man made himself small, and Juiwaiyu put him on the top of his
head, bound him firmly in his hair, bound him so that no one could see
him. Then he went up on the sweat-house and turned toward the sun.

"Sun, O Sun, I wish you to be slow," said he. "I must go very far; I
wish the day to last long."

"I will tell you now of the road," said Jupka. "When you come near a
small mountain east of Wahkalu, there will be three roads there before
you; one on the right hand very narrow. You can hardly see that road,
it is so little beaten, but you must find it, for you cannot go by
another. There is a middle road, smooth and wide; you will see fresh
clover scattered on the road, just as if women had carried some over
and dropped a little here and there. If you go over that road, you
will be killed by lice and wind. On the left hand is a road; if you
take that, you will lose yourself and never reach any place."

"I will sing now," said Juiwaiyu, "and my song will be heard
everywhere, north, south, east, and west."

He began, and rose in the air as he sang; he rose, and as he moved
forward, the whole world heard him; every one looked up to see who was
singing, but no one saw anything.

"That sounds like the song of Juiwaiyu," said some of the people. "I
think that is the voice of Periwiriwaiyu's son," said others; "I think
that is he, for that's how he sings when he travels."

They tried to see who was singing, but saw no one. The song seemed
just above them, but it was high up, very high in the air.

"Hurry, my nephew, hurry," said Jupka; "I don't like to camp on the
journey, I want to be at that place before sunset."

Juiwaiyu sang faster now; he could not move without singing. He moved
swiftly, and soon they were east of Wahkalu.

"Look down carefully," said Jupka; "if you see clover scattered on a
road, you must not go over it. Go over that road on the right, do not
look at the other."

Damhauja had sent people to scatter clover on the middle road and
entice men, make them think that the road to his sweat-house.

"The middle road lies straight toward the mountain," said Jupka; "all
people die who try to pass over it. A great many lie dead on that road
now, my nephew; do not go near it."

Juiwaiyu kept on; soon they heard laughter ahead on the small
mountain, loud laughter.

"You are on the wrong road," said Jupka. "Turn back, my nephew; if
not, you will die surely. That was the laughter of people sent by
Damhauja to kill all who go over the middle road."

Juiwaiyu kept on; he would not listen to his uncle. Soon a great wind
came, bringing clouds of lice with it; the air was filled with them.
They fell on Juiwaiyu, and ate the flesh off his body. The wind drove
him far back on his journey, and blew the beads from his neck. The
people of the mountain did this,--people put there and kept by
Damhauja.

Juiwaiyu was angry. He rushed forward a second time.

"I will pass, I will go through this time," said he.

"I told you of this trouble," said Jupka, "I warned you. I said that
this was an evil road over which no one can pass. Stop, or you will be
dead before night comes. Stop! Let me down; I will save you."

Juiwaiyu came to the ground, and took out his uncle.

"I will save you," said Jupka; "I will give you back flesh and
strength."

The old man took his pipe and drew smoke through it. The wind went
away; the lice disappeared, not one was left anywhere. Jupka took up a
rose-twig. With this he whipped Juiwaiyu, and he was as sound and
strong as ever. He had all his flesh back in a moment.

The people of the mountain saw this. "We cannot kill him," said they;
"he has too much power for us."

"You must turn back and start where the roads part," said Jupka. "On
the right is a small narrow trail; you can barely see it, but you must
find this trail. You cannot go to Damhauja's house by another way."

Juiwaiyu went back to where the paths parted.

"You are looking for the way," said Jupka. "If you see a narrow little
trail, that is it."

He found that trail at last. "That is the right way," said the uncle.

It was so narrow that Juiwaiyu was barely able to see it. He went
forward easily; went fast, like a man who is running down hill. They
came to the small mountain, and when Juiwaiyu was above it, he heard
laughing at a distant village. "That must be the place to which we are
going," said he.

"My nephew, look out now, be careful. When you go into Damhauja's
sweat-house and sit with his daughters, he will give you a pipe filled
with crushed bones of people instead of tobacco. If you breathe smoke
from that pipe, you will die the next moment. With this smoke he has
killed those who escaped lice and wind from the mountain."

Juiwaiyu rested awhile, and thought of the beads he had lost. "I wish
my beads would return to me," said he. That moment the beads were on
his neck. They were as beautiful as ever.

"My beads, you must not go again from me. You must stay with me, and
you must be in plenty. Pahnino Marimi, I wish you to send your
daughters for leaves, wood, and water. Be kind when I come to you. Do
not kill me. Let us go on," said he to his uncle.

They went forward, and soon they saw two girls, one holding the other
by the hand. These girls were coming toward the mountain, swaying
their hands and singing. Juiwaiyu came to the ground, hid behind a
tree, and said, "Let there be wood here in plenty, wood for these
women." The wood was right there in one moment.

The two girls set down their baskets and filled them. "I wish that man
would come," said one sister to the other, "the man we dreamed of last
night."

They put down their hands to take the baskets. Juiwaiyu caught their
hands. They looked around, saw him, and were frightened.

"Why are you frightened? I dreamed of you last night, you dreamed of
me. Go home, go ahead, hurry forward, I will follow; I will be at your
father's house soon."

They put the baskets on their backs, ran quickly, reached home soon,
threw down the baskets outside the doorway, and rushed into the
sweat-house.

"What are you scared at, my daughters? You saw some young man in the
woods, I think," said Pahnino, their mother, who was making acorn
bread outside the doorway. "I think that some brother-in-law was
watching you near the mountain."

"You have never seen the man we met," said the sisters.

Pahnino went to look; she looked carefully, but saw no man coming
toward her from any side. The two sisters spread a black bearskin and
sat on it, sat near each other and waited. The old man went out to
look, put his hand over his eyes to see a new son-in-law, but could
see no one. Juiwaiyu was on the house now; he went down through the
central pillar, passed through the ground, and came up between
Damhauja's two daughters. Pahnino Marimi walked in at that moment to
scold her daughters. She looked, and saw Juiwaiyu between them.

"Some one is sitting with our daughters," said she to the old man.

Damhauja went for his pipe, put in crushed bones of Mapchemaina, and
handed the pipe to his daughters.

"Give this to my son-in-law," said he.

They did not like to take the pipe, but they could not refuse their
father, they could not help themselves. They were crying.

"You must not smoke this," whispered they; "we will give you another
kind." They took the tobacco out and put in some of the common sort.
The old man did not watch sharply at first; he was thinking only to
see Juiwaiyu drop dead. The girls handed back the empty pipe to their
father.

Jupka, who was sitting on his nephew's head, laughed in his own mind.

"I don't know what sort of man this is," thought Damhauja; "I have
never seen such a person. I think he must have come to fight with me;
I will try him once more."

He filled the pipe a second time, and gave it to his daughters. They
handed it to Juiwaiyu. This time they could not change the tobacco.
Damhauja was watching too carefully. Jupka smoked this pipe. No smoke
could hurt him. Damhauja, who hoped to see Juiwaiyu fall dead, became
frightened when he saw him as well as ever.

"What am I to do?" thought he. "I give this tobacco to every man who
comes for my daughters, and every man who smokes dies right away. I am
afraid of my new son-in-law. I will not fight with this man. Let my
other sons-in-law try him. My daughters, I want you to give nice food
to your husband; give him good things to eat, take the best care of
him, treat him well. My boys, I want you to bring plenty of nice food
to my son-in-law."

"I will give venison now to these sisters," thought Jupka; and he took
out a small piece of fat venison as large as a walnut. This he gave to
Juiwaiyu, and told him to ask for a large basket. They brought it.

"You, venison, keep this size," said Juiwaiyu; "be no smaller, you
must not be gone;" and then he cut slices.

Damhauja carried off three great baskets of meat, then went out on the
housetop and called all his sons.

"Come for venison, my sons," said he. "There is plenty for all of
you."

Damhauja had a great many sons-in-law on the west beyond a river. All
his daughters were married except two. These sons-in-law heard him
call and wondered. "What has happened?" asked they of one another.
"We've never heard the old man talk that way before. He must have
found a new son-in-law; he must have found a husband for Halaia and
Pahnino Marimi."

All Damhauja's sons came into the sweat-house.

Kechowala, a son-in-law and chief on the west side, sent his two sons,
Kechowala and Darijua, to see what was happening at the sweat-house.

When the boys came and looked in, the elder saw a man, he thought, but
did not know him. Damhauja's sons were dancing a fire-dance. The two
brothers looked around carefully, but the younger did not see the
strange man. They ran down from the sweat-house, and on the way home
began to quarrel.

"I think our grandfather has a new son-in-law; I saw him," said
Kechowala, the elder.

"You did not," said the younger.

"Why do you try to hide him, why do you deny? I saw him surely."

"When we get home, you will say that you saw a stranger in the
sweat-house; but if you do, you will lie."

"We shall see great trouble, I think," said the elder; "there will be
fighting now our grandfather has a new son-in-law, there will be great
fighting."

The two boys ran very fast, disputing as they went. They got to the
river, swam across, ran home.

"There is a strange man over there; grandfather has a new son-in-law,"
said Kechowala.

"Don't believe what he says," cried Darijua to his father; "I could
not see any man."

"Why do you want to hide him, why do you deny? You must have seen him
plainly."

"I did not see him, and you did not. I saw all who were there, but I
saw no stranger."

"I saw him sitting between the two girls," said Kechowala.

"He is there," said the father. "I will see that man to-morrow."

"My son-in-law," said Damhauja, "you must be careful to-morrow. I have
a great many daughters besides your two wives; their husbands will try
to kill you." Then Damhauja said to his sons: "We will go to sleep and
rise early; take good care of your brother-in-law to-morrow."

All went to rest; Juiwaiyu and his wives as well as others.

When all were asleep, Juiwaiyu took Jupka out of his hair and rose up.
"I wish for daylight quickly," said he.

Thunder roared then, and some rain came; Juiwaiyu wished to let his
mother know that he was well. He went out, took one step and went from
the sweat-house to the other side of the nearest mountain, with the
second step he went to the top of a mountain beyond.

Jupka was angry because Damhauja had tried to kill Juiwaiyu with the
poisonous pipe. Now he took vengeance. He put the two sisters on a
high place in the sweat-house, made a great storm of wind and rain.
Soon the whole place was filled with water. It rolled and swept
through the sweat-house, drowned Damhauja and his wife; washed their
bodies out through the door away.

Juiwaiyu on the mountain took his yaiyauna flute and began to play.
All the world heard him, all people went to hill-tops and
mountain-tops, all stretched their heads up and listened, all said,
"That must be Juiwaiyu; no one plays in that way but Juiwaiyu." Deer
began to come from the east along the same way over which Juiwaiyu had
come, and all stood before him.

"Let one stand in front of me and look this way," said Juiwaiyu, "let
all the others stand behind that first one."

They stood in the line, a fawn in the first place. He shot them all
with one arrow, hundreds of them. The arrow entered the mouth of the
front deer and went out near the tail of the last. Then Juiwaiyu took
the little fawn and opened it, made the deer very small, put them all
inside the fawn's body, took that home in one hand, threw the fawn
down on the sweat-house. The deer inside the fawn became as big as
ever, rolled down, filled the whole place around the sweat-house.

Juiwaiyu now saw Damhauja and Pahnino Marimi lying cold and dead. He
ran then to Jupka in the sweat-house. "Bring them to life, my uncle;
bring them to life again!"

Jupka whipped both with a rose-twig and brought them to life. Damhauja
shook himself and said, "I slept too hard."

"You would not have waked up at all but for my nephew. You wanted to
kill him. I punished you."

Damhauja knew Jupka now. "Oh, why did you not let me know that you
were here? I would not have tried to hurt Juiwaiyu."

The old man saw so many deer around the sweat-house that he didn't
know what to think. At last he went up on the sweat-house. "Come, my
sons, come," cried he; "there is venison here for all of you."

All the sons came. Each had one deer, and there were many others to
spare.

All the sons-in-law in the west were angry that Damhauja's sons had so
much venison.

"We will go over and see this man," said Kechowala, the chief. "We
will have some fun to-day with him."

When Damhauja's eldest son was bringing venison to his father, he saw
Kechowala. "He is coming," said the son.

Kechowala had an angry face; he walked fast. When he reached the
sweat-house, all were eating venison. He went to the top of the
sweat-house, took his arrow from under his arm, and said, "Wake up, be
ready; we must play to-day."

Then he looked in and saw Juiwaiyu sitting between the two sisters. "I
know now who that man is; he is from the east. Feed him well, dress
him well, father-in-law; we must have fun before he goes from here. He
must show what he can do before he leaves us."

The old man went out and scolded Kechowala: "You talk loud, you want
fat venison; that's what you have come for, that's why you are at this
sweat-house."

Jupka heard all that Kechowala said.

"I will go home now," said Kechowala, "and be here after breakfast."

"My son-in-law will be killed to-day," said Pahnino Marimi; "what can
we do? They are going to kill our son-in-law who brings so much
venison. Stay in the house, do not go out," said Pahnino.

"Do not go out," said the brothers; "we will meet those people."

All looked, and saw a great crowd coming from the west. The
brothers-in-law were coming, and when near they shouted to Damhauja's
sons. The two sisters tried to stop Juiwaiyu.

"Let me go, wives," said he, "let me go. If I stay here, they will
call me a coward; I will let no one give me that name."

"I want to see that new man who is here," cried Kechowala, "I want to
talk with him."

"I will go out," said Juiwaiyu, to his wives. "My father and mother
told me of this place. I know what it is."

"Come out!" called Kechowala at the door, "come out; don't be afraid
of us, don't be a coward."

"I will come when I am ready, I will meet you."

Kechowala went to his people. "He will be here soon," said he.

All laughed; all were glad. "If he comes," thought they, "we will kill
him."

Juiwaiyu went out and stood on the housetop, looked around, looked at
his enemies, went down slowly, went as if he did not like to meet
them.

"Why are you afraid?" asked Kechowala. "Do you think that we will hurt
you?"

He went to them, he sat on a stone. He had but one arrow, and that
without a point. This was a staff which his uncle had given him. The
playground was beyond a hill at some distance from the sweat-house.
"Stand up and play," said the sons-in-law; and they pushed Juiwaiyu to
throw him, but he did not fall. All went to the playground. Juiwaiyu
caught the bones on his club at the middle point, then hurled them;
ran and caught them the second time, ran again, put the bones beyond
the barrier. He did the same a second time, and won the first game. He
won two games; no one else could win.

"Well," said the western brothers-in-law, "we have never seen any one
play bone like him. We will try him in some other way."

Next they gave him a start in racing. The race was to a mountain
opposite. Juiwaiyu was to get there first if he was able. They thought
to strike him from behind, kill him easily, but they could not come
near him. He was at the mountain before they had run half the
distance. In the afternoon they played bone a second time. They
thought to kill him surely in this way. Between the middle of the
playground and Juiwaiyu's barrier they put a great poison spider right
on the path where Juiwaiyu was to run, Jupka knew their plan, and
pointed out the spider to his nephew. Juiwaiyu jumped on the spider,
crushed it right away before it could turn to poison him; then he took
the bones beyond the barrier.

He went back to the middle of the playground. Kechowala's men said
nothing, made no mention of the spider. Juiwaiyu took the bones beyond
the barrier that time, and won the second inning. This made the first
game of the afternoon. While they were making ready for the second
game, Kechowala had flint knives and spear-points put on the path so
that Juiwaiyu should fall and kill himself.

They commenced the second game. Juiwaiyu took the bones from all and
ran ahead, ran quickly. When near the knives and spear-points, Jupka
told him where they were; he came down between some, sprang over
others, took the bones beyond the barrier, came back as if nothing had
been put upon his path; went a second time and won the second game.

He had beaten all who had played against him. They were very angry.
"We must kill him surely in another way," said Kechowala.

The playground was far from the sweat-house, and when Juiwaiyu had won
the second game he turned to go back to the sweat-house. Kechowala
sent a rattlesnake to meet him at one place and a grizzly bear at
another. Juiwaiyu jumped on the snake, and crushed his head. When he
came to the bear, he struck him one blow with his foot and killed him.
He skinned both, took the skins, and hung them up before the
sweat-house.

When Kechowala's men saw the skins, they were angry, terribly
excited; they stopped before the sweat-house, jumped, and shouted,--

"We want to look at Juiwaiyu. Let Juiwaiyu come out here; we want to
see him."

Juiwaiyu went out. All the brothers-in-law from the west crowded up
toward him, all wanted then to kill him. He had no arms but the staff
given by Jupka. All he needed was to point that at any one and say, "I
wish you dead;" that moment the person fell dead. No one could come
near Juiwaiyu when running or hit him, and before they stopped
threatening he killed half of Damhauja's sons-in-law. The others ran
home then, killed their own wives and those of the dead men. "We will
have nothing," said they, "that comes from Damhauja's." They killed
all the children, too; none escaped but Darijua, who ran over to the
sweat-house and told of the killing.

That night Jupka made a great storm, and drowned every western man
left alive by Juiwaiyu. Next morning early he went over, struck the
dead women and children with his rose-twig, brought all except the men
to life again, and took them to Damhauja's.

Juiwaiyu had brought as many deer that morning as he had the first
one. Damhauja made his house stretch out and grow to give room enough
for all the children. They cooked venison and feasted, feasted all
that day at the sweat-house.

Next morning Juiwaiyu went home with his two wives and his uncle.




THE FLIGHT OF TSANUNEWA AND DEFEAT OF HEHKU


PERSONAGES

After each name is given that of the creature or thing into which the
personage was changed subsequently.

=Ahalamila=, gray wolf; =Bohkuina=, silver-gray fox; =Chichi=, fish
hawk; =Demauna=, pine marten; =Gagi=, crow; =Haka Kaina=, flint;
=Hehku=, horned serpent; =Jihkulú=, big owl; =Jupka=, butterfly of the
wild silkworm; =Kaítsiki=, ground squirrel; =Kechowala=, bluejay;
=Malewula=, wolf; =Malwila=, meadow lark; =Manjauchu=, gopher;
=Mapchemaina=, the first people now turned into birds, beasts, and
other things; =Matauwila=, beaver; =Matdasi=, spring salmon; =Míniau
Marimi=, fire-drill woman; =Tillipka=, crane; =Periwiri Yupa=, acorn
of the black oak; =Petaina=, skunk; =Topuna=, mountain lion;
=Tsanunewa=, elk; =Tsuwalkai=, red flint; =Pútokya=, skull people,
_i. e._ people who could turn themselves into a head.

       *       *       *       *       *

A long time ago, when Jupka and Bohkuina were sitting in the
sweat-house Jigulmatu, Jupka called to him people of the Mapchemaina;
he called Demauna, Wirula, Matauwila, Topuna, Ahalamila, Manjauchu,
Kechowala, Malwila, Gagi, and many others. He did not make them; he
just called, and they came from different parts of the earth to him.
He gave them their names and said,--

"Hereafter all who live in the world will call you as I do now."

One side of Jigulmatu was filled with these people called up by Jupka.

"This is Jigulmatu, my small sweat-house," said Jupka, "but I am going
to make my Igunna" (great house); and later he made Wahkalu (Mount
Shasta), made it to be his great house, but he lived at Jigulmatu till
he made the Yana, and went to Jigulmatu often afterward.

At this time Tsuwalkai Marimi, an old woman, had reared a small boy.
His name was Tsanunewa. She called the boy grandson, and he called her
his grandmother. He was an orphan. All his kindred were dead; all had
been killed one after another, and he was alone when the old woman
found the boy and reared him.

"I want to go west and catch mice," said Tsanunewa one day to her.

"I don't want you to go away from the house. I don't want you to trap
mice; you might go astray; you might get killed," said the old woman.

Tsanunewa began to cry. He cried and teased till at last she said:
"Go, if you wish, but be careful; you may get hurt. The traps may fall
on you; something may kill you."

The old woman made acorn bread for him, and showed him how to set rock
traps and other traps, and how to bait them with acorns.

"Stay around the house," said she. "You must not go near that rocky
mountain off there. That is a bad place, a very bad place; it is
dangerous. You must not go to it."

The boy started, went some distance from the house, then stood still
and looked at the rocky mountain.

"I will go to that place," thought he; "I will go where my grandmother
told me not to go. Why is she afraid? Why did she tell me not to go
there? I will run and see."

He hurried off to the mountain, went up on the rocks, looked around
all the time; he remembered his grandmother's words, and said to
himself,--

"I should like to know who is here; I should like to know what
frightens my grandmother."

He went around the mountain, saw no one, set all his traps, big traps
and little ones; he stayed there till near sunset. After that he ran
home.

"I am afraid to eat to-night," said he. "If I eat, perhaps the mice
will not like the acorns in my traps."

"You must not eat," said his grandmother; "I do not wish you to eat
anything. You must not touch salmon this evening. You may eat a little
just at midnight. Now go and play around the house; all the mice will
see you; they are out playing and will go to your traps."

Hehku Marimi lived at that mountain. She killed all the people who
went there to trap. It was she who had killed Tsanunewa's kindred.

Next morning at daybreak Tsanunewa went to see his traps. He looked at
the first, second, third, fourth; he had not caught anything. The
traps were empty, just as he had left them. He found nothing till he
reached the last one; he saw that there was something in that trap. He
stood and looked at it; saw Hehku Marimi; she was there in the last
trap. She had made herself small and gone in. She looked ugly, and
Tsanunewa was frightened. He ran home as fast as he could; he was
pale, and trembling.

"Why are you frightened?" asked his grandmother. "What have you
caught?"

"I have caught something. I don't know what it is. I am terribly
afraid of it."

"I told you yesterday not to go to that mountain. I knew that trouble
would come if you went there. I will go myself and see what you have
caught."

Tsuwalkai Marimi was ready to run to the mountain and look at the
trap. She wanted to know what was in it.

"You, my grandson, stay here at home," said she; "perhaps the thing
that you have caught is not dead yet. I will look at it."

The old woman started, but as she was going out she said: "Maybe Hehku
is in your trap. If she is, she will get out, run here and kill us
both perhaps; kill you, surely, if she finds you. Save yourself, my
grandson. If you see her coming, run west, run very hard, run till you
come to a great river. On the other side of it is Mipka's house; shout
to him, call him uncle, tell him to take you over; say that you are
running for your life, that he must save you."

While the old woman was talking, she looked and saw Hehku far off at
the mountain.

"My grandson," cried she, "Hehku is coming! She will kill you. Run! I
will stay here and stop her a while."

Tsanunewa looked and saw Hehku. Then he ran west; ran till he reached
the great river. He stopped at the edge of it and shouted.

Hehku had made herself small the night before, and gone into
Tsanunewa's trap purposely. The boy thought that she was angry because
he had trapped her. She wanted him to think so. She went into the trap
to have an excuse to kill him as she had killed all his kindred. When
Tsanunewa ran home to his grandmother, frightened because he had seen
Hehku, Hehku went out of the trap, crushed red rottenstone, painted
her face, made it blood color. She had a big cap made of skulls,
skulls of people she had killed. She put the cap on her head then, and
started. She started, ran quickly, singing as she went,--

    "I am following Tsanunewa; I am on his track.
    I am following Tsanunewa; I am on his track."

She sang till she came to the door. There she stopped, said "Whu!" and
drew a long breath.

"Tell me, old woman," cried she, "tell me where Tsanunewa is; I have
come to this house on his track."

"I have not seen that boy," said Tsuwalkai Marimi. "I do not know
where he is. I am alone, all my people are dead; you killed them."

"I will not hurt you," said Hehku; "I will not touch you, but tell me
where the boy is; tell me which way he went. He went west, I think. I
will follow till I catch him."

She started and ran very fast; raised a great wind as she went. She
ran with her hands clasped behind her, and sang,--

    "I am following Tsanunewa; I am on his track.
    I am following Tsanunewa; I am on his track."

The boy ran swiftly, ran with all his strength; was at the great river
first. Mipka was at the other side.

"Save me, my uncle!" cried Tsanunewa; "put your leg over the water,
put it over quickly. Hehku is hunting me. I am running for my life.
Save me, my uncle, save me!"

Mipka came out, saw the boy on the opposite bank, stretched his leg
over the water; the boy ran across on it. Hehku came to the river just
after Tsanunewa had run into the house, and Mipka had drawn his leg
back again. Inside was a large log with a small hole in the heart of
it. Tsanunewa crept into that hole and hid quickly.

"Hehku will not find me here," thought he. But Hehku saw him from the
other bank, knew where he was hidden.

The old man hurried after Tsanunewa. Hehku reached the river when
Mipka stepped across the door.

"Old man," cried she, "put your leg over the water. Let me cross. Put
your leg over the water!"

Mipka stood inside the door; seemed not to hear.

"Put your leg over the water!" cried Hehku.

"Creep out and run west for your life," said Mipka to Tsanunewa. "Run;
I will stop Hehku; I will keep her here for a while. Run to
Matauwila's; he may be able to save you."

Tsanunewa crept out through the western end of the sweat-house and
ran.

"Old man, put your leg over the river. Let me cross on it!" cried
Hehku. She was very angry now, but Mipka refused for a long time.

At last he stretched his leg from inside the door to the opposite bank
of the river. He did this hoping that Hehku would run in on his leg,
be speared in the doorway and die there. Mipka had long and very sharp
spears fixed in above the doorway to kill people whom he hated.

But Hehku jumped off his leg at the river side. She would not go in at
the door; she climbed to the roof of the sweat-house.

"Old man, give me Tsanunewa. I saw him run into your house. Old man,
give me Tsanunewa or tell me where he is."

"I cannot tell where he is. He is not in my house," said Mipka.

"Tell me, old man, where that boy is, or I will kill you. I do not
want to go into your house, but if I go in I will kill you. Only tell
me where Tsanunewa is. If you hide that boy I will kill you."

"If you think Tsanunewa is here, come down, come in, look through my
house," said Mipka.

Sharp spears were pointing upward toward this door in the roof of the
sweat-house. Hehku was very angry; she slipped down in a hurry. The
spear-points went into her body and killed her. She fell dead on the
floor of the sweat-house. She lay a while dead there; then came to
life and stood up again. She caught Mipka right away, and they
fought, fought a long time, fought till she swallowed him down at one
mouthful.

While Hehku and Mipka were fighting a long battle in the sweat-house,
Tsanunewa had run far away toward the west. He was now in sight of
Matauwila's sweat-house. When he was near enough to call, he
shouted,--

"Grandfather, I am running for my life; save me!"

Matauwila ran out and helped the boy into the sweat-house.

"Grandfather, I want you to set traps in this house, set traps all
around in it. Hehku is hunting me; she will kill me if she catches
me."

Matauwila made four rows of double traps in the house.

"I will catch Hehku," said Matauwila, "but you would better run west;
run till you come to the house of the Chichi brothers."

The boy ran away to the west. He was hardly out of sight when Hehku
came. She made a great wind as she ran to the house.

"Old man," cried she, "where is Tsanunewa? Tell me where that boy is.
I have tracked him to your house. Tell me where he is, or I will kill
you."

"Come in," said Matauwila; "but you will not find the boy here. Come
in. Sit down in my house, look all over it. Come in, but you'll not
find the boy. Come in."

The central pillar of Matauwila's house was large and very smooth.
Hehku could not hold to it, but fell down and dropped into the first
trap. She broke right through that, and went through the three other
lines of double traps.

When Hehku burst through the traps, her body was flashing red fire
from every part of it, she was so angry. This fire from her body
killed Matauwila.

Hehku ran after the boy again; ran with her hands clasped behind her.
She ran that way always, and sang as she ran,--

    "I am following Tsanunewa; I am on his track.
    I am following Tsanunewa; I am on his track."

The boy rushed to the house of the Chichi. There were two brothers of
them.

The Chichis had two smooth rocks which looked like ice, but were more
slippery than any ice (rock crystals). One of these was at the eastern
door, the other at the opening on the roof.

"Grandfathers, save me!" cried Tsanunewa, running up to the door of
the house. "Grandfathers, save me!" cried he, running in.

Hehku was close behind now; she had almost caught him. When she
reached the door, she stepped on the crystal rock, slipped, and fell.
One Chichi closed the door in her face then. She sprang up, climbed
the side of the house, went to the door in the roof, stepped on the
second crystal in front of that door, slipped, and fell headlong; fell
into the sweat-house. She sprang up, caught one Chichi, fought with
him. His brother helped that one. The two fought a long time against
Hehku till she caught each by the arm, held them both with one hand,
and pounded them with the crystal from the lower door which she held
in her other hand. At last she said, "Whu!" and swallowed both at one
mouthful. While she was fighting with the Chichi brothers, Tsanunewa
ran on, ran to the west. Hehku was tired now.

"I cannot run farther," said she. She went to the housetop and cried,
"I wish this house to stretch out after that boy and catch him."

She sat on the housetop, and the house stretched out westward,
stretched more quickly than any one could run, and carried her after
Tsanunewa. The boy had run very far; he was near Jupka's house now.

"Uncle!" cried he, "I want to come in quickly. I am almost dead. Hehku
is chasing me. Hide me, my uncle, hide me. Save me, my uncle, save me,
or Hehku will kill me."

"Why are you frightened?" asked Jupka. "I should like to see the
person who is chasing you. I should like to see any one dare to hurt
you. Come in, my nephew, come in."

"Carry me, uncle. I am too tired to walk alone. Carry me. Hehku is
hunting me; she has almost caught up with me."

Jupka took the boy, carried him in. The sweat-house was full of
Mapchemaina people, all those people called in by Jupka.

Hehku jumped off the house of the Chichi brothers, which had brought
her almost to Jigulmatu. She was rested.

"Go back now to your own place," said she to the house; and it shrank
back to its own place.

"Tell me, old man," said she to Jupka, "tell me where Tsanunewa is. I
saw him go into your sweat-house. I want him."

"Come in," said Jupka. "Come if you like. Why are you hunting that
boy? What do you want of him?"

"Do not speak in that way to me," said Hehku. "Tell where the boy is."

"Come in, I will give you a husband," said Jupka. "I will give you a
husband; let the boy go. Take Demauna."

Hehku shook her head.

"Well, I will give you Wirula for husband; let the boy go."

Hehku shook her head a second time.

He offered every one in the house except himself. She refused one,
then another and another; refused all.

"Tell me where that boy is," said she. "I want him; I want no one
else. I want nothing more from you. Just tell me where that boy is. I
want none of your people; the only one I want is Tsanunewa."

Jupka had put the boy under his own hair, under the hair at the back
of his head, and kept him hidden there.

"I must know what you are going to do with that boy," said Jupka to
Hehku Marimi. "I am not willing to give him to you; he is too small
to be your husband. I want to keep him here in my sweat-house."

After that he went aside and said to Tsanunewa, "If you like this
woman, I will let you go with her; if you do not wish to go, I will
keep you."

"I will not go with her; she would kill me on the road. She wants to
kill me; that's why she is hunting me, that's why she came here."

"Bring out that boy!" cried Hehku; "I want to see him. I want to go
home; I want to take him home with me."

"This is a bad woman. I have heard much of her. Give her the boy, put
him down; let us see what she will do with him," said each of those
present.

But Jupka kept Tsanunewa hidden, would not give him up.

"I know that woman," repeated each of the Mapchemaina: "she is bad.
When she is angry, fire flashes from her body. She kills every one.
You would better let the boy go and save us."

"Spread robes out," said Jupka. "Let her come in here; let her sit
down. We will hear what she says."

Jupka rubbed the boy's face and body, made him smooth, and from being
small he was large, full-grown, and very beautiful. Jupka seated him
on the robe. Every one could see him.

Hehku came in and sat on the robe. When she took her place, fire
flashed from her through the whole sweat-house. She took off her cap
made of skulls and put it at her side.

The people looked down. All were afraid except Jupka. They thought
she would kill them right there in a moment. When Jupka saw the fire,
he took tobacco from a small pouch which he kept in his ear, and while
lying stretched out he began to smoke without putting fire on his
pipe. The tobacco burned when he drew his breath through it. The smoke
rose and then settled down. It grew dark in the sweat-house, and the
fire from Hehku's body died away. She stopped her mouth and nose so as
not to breathe Jupka's smoke.

"Go to sleep," said Jupka to Hehku Marimi.

She would not obey. She kept her mouth and nose closed, sat awake and
would not sleep.

"Lie down; let us talk," said Tsanunewa. He thought, "If she lies down
the smoke will kill her."

"I will not lie down," said Hehku.

"Why not? Lie down. We will talk together."

"I never sleep," said Hehku. "I am Mapchemaina. I never sleep at
night, I never sleep in the day. I do as my father does; he hunts at
night and hunts during daylight."

Jupka filled his pipe again with another tobacco which he kept in his
ear, and again he puffed smoke which was very strong, the strongest
smoke of all. "This will do," said he, "this will make her sleep, I
think."

The smoke rose first, then came down and settled like a thick cloud
right on Hehku's head.

"Why this woman tries to trick me?" thought Jupka; "I know more than
she does."

When this strong smoke settled down, Hehku began to nod; her head
went first to one side, then to the other; soon it turned backward
little by little. Jupka took a large roll of gray wolfskins, slipped
it behind her, and she dropped on it sound asleep; lay as though
lifeless.

["We have never seen this tobacco here," said the narrator of the
story. "It was turned to rock long ago; this was done far in the East,
way off where the sun rises. The rock is there now, and it is called
Talpapa--white tobacco rock. This is Mapchemaina tobacco." The first
tobacco Jupka used was moiyu, the Yana tobacco that we have in our
time.]

"If Hehku dreams, she will beat me when she wakes, if she is wise; but
I will not let her dream," said Jupka. He blew his breath on her face;
she could not dream after that.

Hehku used to dream bad things which came to pass later on. She used
to dream of killing people, but after Jupka blew his breath on her
face she could not dream in his sweat-house. Next day, when she woke,
she was very angry at Jupka. She stood up, walked out of the
sweat-house, went to the east; went quickly, went to that same rocky
mountain where Tsanunewa had set his mousetraps.

"Make a good fire and sweat," said Jupka to the Mapchemaina.

All sweated and bathed in the river, and that day Hehku became a
Putokya, a skull person. She stayed one night at the rocky mountain;
dreamed of gambling with Jupka and all the people at Jigulmatu.

Hehku had a sister, Miniau Marimi. She took this sister as a
companion. Both started, went together, and never stopped till they
reached Oaimatu, a great hollow mountain northeast of Jigulmatu. Hehku
brought a pipe with her, and made tobacco of dried brains. "My smoke
will be stronger than Jupka's," thought Hehku. She spent one night in
the hollow mountain, and dreamed again of gambling in Jupka's
sweat-house. She rose early, and was in Jigulmatu at daylight. She
stood with Miniau Marimi on the roof of the sweat-house, and sang to
herself,--

    "I shall win, I shall win, I shall win surely."

"Jupka, I wish to go into your sweat-house," said she. "When I go in,
you will like me, you will like to see me. I am nice to look at."

She changed; made herself very beautiful then. No one could know her;
no one could know that that woman was the Hehku who had hunted
Tsanunewa.

At sunrise all the people in Jupka's sweat-house heard steps above,
heard walking on the sweat-house. The two women were there. Hehku came
to the roof-door and said,--

"Jupka, put away your things; clear your house. I want to come down
and gamble with you. I dreamed last night that I played with you."

Jupka was lying with his head to the north. He made no answer. Hehku
went down.

"Sit on the west side," said Jupka to the two sisters; and he told
Malewula to spread out two robes, one of cinnamon, the other of black
bearskin. All the people held down their heads. None looked at the
women except Malewula.

"I should be glad to give these women something to eat," said
Malewula, "but I don't know what they like; let us offer them
venison."

He roasted venison, put it before them in a basket; they wouldn't eat
it, wouldn't taste or touch it. Then he brought dried salmon in small
pieces; the women turned away their faces. Next he put salmon flour
and mountain-pine nuts before them; they wouldn't eat, turned aside
their faces.

"Take this food away," said Hehku; "we don't wish to eat. I came here
to see people, I came here to gamble."

The Mapchemaina said nothing for a long time. At last Kaitsiki spoke
up.

"I do not know how to gamble, I cannot play," said he.

"I do not like to hear you talk so. I know you," said Hehku. "I know
that you gamble a great deal. I know that you began to gamble long
ago."

Kaitsiki made no answer. He went to get gambling-sticks (counters). He
brought grass and fixed everything for the play. They sat down, Hehku
on the west, Kaitsiki on the east.

"What will you play for, what will you bet?" asked the woman.

Kaitsiki took his shell necklace, hung it up, and said, "I will begin
with this."

Hehku handled the Jupaiauna; it was hers, and made of a finger-bone.
Kaitsiki guessed "north" the first time, and lost; after that he
guessed north once and south once, lost both times; after that he lost
his ten sticks.

"Take the necklace and hang it on our side," said Hehku to Miniau.

When Hehku put her hands out, she held them together in front before
opening them, and sang "Wahau Putokya jinda Marimi" (You will not win
against Putokya Marimi); and the bone went to the side opposite the
one guessed. The singing made it go. When Kaitsiki guessed "north," if
the bone was in Hehku's right hand, the south side, it stayed there;
if it was in her left hand, the north side, it went to her right. In
this way no one could ever win against Hehku.

"Play again," said Hehku.

Kaitsiki bet and lost. He lost one thing after another till he bet his
last, a belt of red-headed woodpecker scalps. It was very beautiful.
Hehku was glad.

"This is the bet," said she, "that Perriwiri Yupa always makes. He
bets a girdle like this when I play with him."

"I will guess south all the time now," said Kaitsiki. He lost five
times, then changed his mind, guessed north.

All the Mapchemainas looked on, watched the play, but said nothing.
They knew what was coming; knew that Kaitsiki would lose. He guessed
north five times; lost his girdle.

"I have nothing more to bet; you have won all I had," said Kaitsiki.

"Bet yourself," said Hehku. "I will bet all I have won from you."

Kaitsiki bet himself. He guessed south first, and lost.

"Oh, if I had only bet north!" said he. Next time he bet north, and
lost.

"Oh, if I had said south!"

He went on in this way till he lost his ten counters and himself.

Hehku threw the finger-bone on the ground; the earth shook; there was
a noise like thunder. The bone flew up, struck Kaitsiki, killed him.
Miniau Marimi threw him out through the roof to the north of the
sweat-house.

"I will play now," said Ahalamila, sitting down in the place left by
Kaitsiki. He guessed, lost, guessed on and played till he lost
everything; bet himself, lost, was killed and thrown north of the
sweat-house. Petaina played next, lost everything, was killed and
thrown out. All in the sweat-house except Jupka played and lost, one
after another, first all they had and then themselves. After Petaina
came Matdasi, Tsurewa, Jihkulu, and then Tsanunewa, who remained at
Jigulmatu.

Hehku danced with delight when Tsanunewa lost. She threw him out of
the sweat-house herself, then played with others till none were left
except Jupka.

Jupka rose up then and said: "Now we will try. I will guess once; that
will finish the play and settle all."

"I am willing," said Hehku.

Jupka brought a blue stone and sat on it. He had a walking-stick made
of the heart of sugar-pine; this he put at his side.

Hehku arranged the bone, put it in her left hand, and Jupka said
"lililim" (let it be north) but said the word in such a way that
another would think he said "ililim," and Hehku thought so, too; the
bone remained in her left hand. She brought both hands from behind her
back, opened them, and was going to throw the bone to kill Jupka.

"Stop! What did I say?" asked Jupka.

"Ililim."

"No, I said 'lililim;' look north and see."

Hehku looked north and saw Wahkalu (Mount Shasta), Jupka's Igunna, his
great new house which he made by saying "lililim." Wahkalu was white,
shining. Hehku had never seen anything so beautiful, so great. She had
never seen it before, neither had any one else.

The bone was there in her open left hand on the north side, she could
not deny. She could not change her play, she could not help herself.
Jupka seized the bone, threw it to the floor. The earth trembled;
there was a roar like thunder; the bone bounded up and killed Hehku.
Jupka threw her out of the sweat-house.

"You must play too," said Jupka to Miniau Marimi.

He put the bone behind his back; she guessed, lost her life, and was
thrown out of the sweat-house.

Jupka walked away southward, went to the creek, washed and swam. When
he came out of the water, he grew very beautiful and large. He took
then the stem of a wild rose-bush and went home; he went to the north
side of the sweat-house. There he found the bodies of the Mapchemainas
who had played with Hehku and lost. He gave each a blow of the
rose-bush, and all came to life; all went to the sweat-house, not one
was missing.

At dawn the dead Hehku began to move and sing. At clear daylight she
stood up, struck Miniau with her right foot. That moment she rose up
alive. The two women started for the rocky mountain. Hehku was raging.
She was terribly angry because Jupka had beaten her.

"I had all," said she, "but Jupka fooled me; now I have nothing."

She grew so angry that she turned into a great head and bounded off to
the east. She went a whole mile every jump she made. She screamed with
rage and shouted as she went, and her sister Miniau (the fire-drill)
kept pace with her.

Haka Kaina heard the noise and said, "I wonder what troubles Putokya
to-day."




THE FIRST BATTLE IN THE WORLD AND THE MAKING OF THE YANA


PERSONAGES

After each name is given that of the creature or thing into which the
personage was changed subsequently.

=Ahalamila=, gray wolf; =Bohkuina=, silver-gray fox; =Chichepa=,
spotted hawk; =Chuhna=, spider; =Hehku=, horned serpent; =Hitchinna=,
wildcat; =Howichinaipa=, a small bird; =Hurskiyupa=, orphan; =Jewina=,
reddish chicken hawk; =Jihkulu=, large owl; =Jupka=, butterfly of wild
silkworm; =Kaítsiki=, ground squirrel; =Kaltsauna=, swift (kind of
lizard); =Kechowala=, bluejay; =Lawalila=, large hawk; =Maibyu=, dove;
=Malewula=, wolf; =Mapchemaina=, first people; =Pakalai Jawichi=,
water lizard; =Petaina=, skunk; =Popila=, duck; =Topuna=, mountain
lion; =Tsanunewa=, a little bird; =Tuina=, the sun; =Wihlaina=,
chipmunk.

       *       *       *       *       *

After Hehku had risen from the dead and gone home, Jupka said to all
the Mapchemaina: "Sweat now and swim. You will go to hunt to-morrow
early."

The Mapchemaina went to hunt on the following day, but could not kill
deer. They had no good arrow-points. The points which they had were
made of common stone. When they went back to Jigulmatu in the evening
without venison, Jupka said,--

"There is an old man in the south who kills a great many deer; his
name is Kaltsauna. I must bring him up here to show you how he kills
them. I will send some one south for him. Maibyu, you go for that old
man; you travel very quickly."

"I don't know where his house is; I cannot find him," said Maibyu.
"You would better send some one else."

"Lawalila, you go," said Jupka.

Lawalila dressed himself nicely; took his bow, quiver, and arrows, and
went. He went as quickly as though it were only one long step to
Kaltsauna's house. Kaltsauna was sitting inside the door with his legs
crossed. He was making flint arrow-points.

Lawalila stepped in at once and surprised old Kaltsauna. He had a
flint knife at his side, and made a thrust at Lawalila as if to kill
him.

"Stop. It is I, uncle; you must not kill me."

"Why do you call me uncle?" asked Kaltsauna, hiding his arrow-points
quickly.

"I have come for you, uncle. The chief sent me here. Jupka invites you
to come to Jigulmatu. He wants you to come to his house. He wants to
see you. We cannot kill deer with stone arrow-points. We have no other
kind. The chief knows that you kill deer all the time. He wants you to
come to his place and show his people how you kill deer."

Kaltsauna rubbed his hands, rubbed them clean, rubbed all the flint
dust from them, and rolled up his flints in a skin very carefully.
Next he mixed flint dust, rubbed it on his face, made paint, covered
his face with it, and thrust a piece of sharp flint through the septum
of his nose. He looked very threatening and strong when he was dressed
and armed for the road.

"I am ready; you go ahead; I will come later," said he to Lawalila.

Kaltsauna's quiver was a grizzly bearskin; his bows and arrows were
made of black oak. He put his flints under his left arm, took his bow
and arrows in his right hand.

"Go on; go ahead. I will come later; I will come by myself. Go now and
tell the chief to make a great fire of manzanita wood."

Lawalila went ahead, and gave Kaltsauna's message to Jupka. The chief
had the fire made,--a great fire of manzanita wood. "He is coming, he
is coming," said the people, when they saw Kaltsauna in the distance.
When he was near, they didn't try to look at him, they hung their
heads.

"Make way for me, make way! I'll strike unless you give me room!" said
Kaltsauna, as he came near the crowd of people.

"The old man always talks like that," said Jupka; "he is very strong.
That's why he is so bold; that's why he talks so."

"Spread out a skin," said Kaltsauna to Jupka.

The skin was spread, and Kaltsauna emptied his robe full of
arrow-points on it. He sat down then and said,--

"I will divide these and put them in different places."

He gathered each kind of flint into a heap by itself, then pushed it,
and said while he pushed, "You go to this place or to that place."

White flint he pushed and said, "Go you, to Hakamatu."

The white flint went away; disappeared from the robe; went to
Hakamatu, and there is plenty of white flint in that place to-day.

Blue flint he sent east to the edge of our Yana country. Yellow flint
he fixed at Iwiljami. To the west he sent flint with fine black, blue,
and white stripes; he sent it to Hakachimatu. Green flint he put in
Jigulmatu and said,--

"You will find these flints always in the places where I put them
to-day, and people who come after you will find them there. There will
be flint in those places forever, as long as people want it."

Besides flint Kaltsauna gave each of the Mapchemaina a wedge made of
deer-horn, and a piece of stone; showed them how to dress the flint
and make arrow-points. The first arrow-points on earth were those
which Kaltsauna made.

Next morning, after he had given the flint and shown the Mapchemaina
how to make arrow-points, Kaltsauna went home. On the second day Jupka
called all the Mapchemaina together and said,--

"Get your arrow-points ready; sweat to-night; swim early in the
morning, and go out on a great hunt to-morrow."

They did all that Jupka commanded, and went on the following morning
toward Jidjilpa. They went west along Jidjilpa, went on both sides of
it; went west toward Tahaujwakaina, which is in the cañon beyond
Hakamatu. They went to the rock and went beyond it.

Some distance west of the rock a grizzly bear ran out of a clump of
live-oak brush. Among the people hunting was Chichepa, and the bear
rushed at him. Chichepa had dreamed the night before that this rock in
the cañon had jumped up from the ground and frightened him. When he
came near the live-oak brush, the bear growled and sprang out.

Chichepa ran back, ran till he came to Tahaujwakaina, the bear close
after him. The bear was so angry that he tore up big oak-trees as he
ran. There was a hole in the top of the rock. Chichepa sprang into it.
The bear stood on his hind legs. He could barely look over the top of
the rock. He looked and saw nothing, dropped down, ran all around the
rock, looked everywhere, saw no sign of Chichepa. Then he turned back
and went into the thick clumps of brush from which he had started.

The people went west a while, then toward the south, and began to find
deer. Bohkuina killed the first deer, Howichinaipa the second,
Kechowala the third, Jihkulu the fourth, Petaina the fifth, and so on
till twenty had deer. The party divided then into two. Those who had
deer turned home toward Jigulmatu, and went in the order in which they
had killed them, Bohkuina first, the others following each in his
turn.

The second party hunted toward the east and then toward Jigulmatu.
After a while they came to Ketmatu, where Malewula killed a deer, and
Topuna killed one, and Tsanunewa killed a terribly ugly big deer which
seemed as though all its flesh and body were swollen. Hitchinna,
Kaitsiki, Wihlaina, and others killed deer; each person killed one
deer. The whole party turned toward Jigulmatu then, and there was
great gladness in Jupka's sweat-house. The women prepared acorns and
mice to eat.

Jupka himself never went hunting; he stayed at Jigulmatu always, just
lay in the house there, told all what they were to do, and showed them
how to do what was needed. When they came in from hunting, all put
their venison in front of the chief, put down before him all the deer
they had killed. Jupka took his flint knife then, and cut the meat
into pieces. He roasted ribs of it, roasted all they brought in. When
it was cooked, the Mapchemaina sat down and ate the meat together.
Jupka placed out before them three very large baskets of mice in three
different places, and in front of each basket were people to deal the
mice out to each person who wished some. When they had eaten, Jupka
stood up and talked to all present.

"I wish you all to come into the sweat-house to-night," said he; "I
wish to tell you where you are to hunt to-morrow."

They went into the sweat-house that evening, sat down and smoked, and
while they were smoking Jupka rose up and spoke to them. Jupka himself
never ate anything of any kind; he smoked tobacco, smoked all the
time; that was the only thing that he ever took into his body. When he
spoke, he said,--

"I think it is better to hunt in the north to-morrow."

"We do not like to go north when we hunt," said some of the people.

"Well, let another tell where to go. To-night I will have
Howichinaipa sing and dance for deer."

Then Jupka thought a while and said: "No, I will get Ahalamila; he is
a good person to dream and sing about deer and to dance. I will tell
Ahalamila to sing and dance to-night. He will tell where you ought to
go, he will say which road to take. I want you all to lie down and
sleep to-night, old men and young, and all the women; let all sleep
till morning, sleep till I call you to the hunt."

When the time came that evening, Ahalamila made a fire and took his
pipe. He blew smoke around in every direction. He put down his pipe
then and took fir-leaves; these he threw on the fire, and while they
were burning he sang,--

          "Wílichuláina kúlmachi, Wílichuláina kúlmachi
    (A quartz rock, a white rock, a quartz rock, a white rock)."

and he put a beautiful white quartz rock on the ground; at each side
of it he thrust into the earth a small twig of fir and one of blue
beech; he put these on the east, west, north, and south sides of the
quartz.

Ahalamila kept looking at the twigs, which rose quickly, grew up, and
became little trees. He walked around them and sang; sang and pinched
off a leaf or a bud from one limb or another as he walked. Soon the
stone began to move of itself, and it swelled and changed shape, till
at last it turned into a white fawn. Just at daybreak the fawn began
to walk around among the trees and sniff as though it smelt something.

Ahalamila picked up the little fawn; blew smoke from his mouth; blew
it around on all sides; then he put the fawn down again and it turned
back into quartz.

It was daylight then, and Ahalamila stopped singing. "I have finished
now," said he. "It will be better for us to hunt on the south side."

"I want you, my people," called Jupka, "to rise up, start out and
hunt. Howichinaipa will go ahead and make a fire."

Howichinaipa went ahead: went south for some distance; the Mapchemaina
followed soon after; went to the place where Howichinaipa had made the
fire. When they came up, there was a good large fire at a place called
Wewauna, half a mile from Hakamatu.

"Come to the fire, wait a while before we start, talk and get ready to
hunt," said Howichinaipa.

Ten men went on farther south to find deer, while the others waited at
the fire. Those ten men went south quickly; then five turned east, and
five turned west to meet again at Wewauna. They came back about the
same time, but not one of them saw deer or game of any kind. Every one
wondered that there was no game in any place. Ahalamila and
Howichinaipa began to dispute and then to quarrel because the ten men
could find no deer.

Howichinaipa was angry; he was offended because Jupka had named him
first, then changed his mind and called Ahalamila to sing for deer. He
was angry, too, and jealous because he wanted one of Ahalamila's wives
who was his own wife's sister. Howichinaipa's wife was a Chuhna, and
Ahalamila's wife was her only sister. Howichinaipa wanted to have the
two sisters as his wives; he wanted both of them. For these two
reasons the Mapchemaina could find no deer that day. Howichinaipa had
power over the deer, and had sent them all under ground. The ten men
had looked in a great many places; they had run south, east, west, and
could find no deer. Then the whole party turned to the southeast; they
went to Chupirkoto. Some said, "What is the use in going farther? We
can find no deer to-day. Ahalamila told us that we should find deer.
Where are they? We cannot see them."

"I do not know," said Ahalamila, "why we find no deer. I sang and
danced last night. I dreamed that I saw deer, that I saw them south of
Jigulmatu."

"You will not see deer or any other game to-day," said Howichinaipa;
"you cannot find deer, no matter how much you sing and dance. You are
not able to find deer, but you have a nice wife. She is very pretty."

"The deer were coming," said Ahalamila, "but you stopped them, you
drove them away;" and he sprang at Howichinaipa to strike him.
Howichinaipa dodged and went down through the ground.

All the people took sides and began to fight; some were for Ahalamila,
others were on Howichinaipa's side. Howichinaipa sprang out from under
the ground, stood before Ahalamila; shot at him. Ahalamila dodged and
shot too; Howichinaipa dodged very quickly.

They fought on in this way, fought hard, moved toward Jigulmatu,
fighting all the time. At last Ahalamila was struck and fell dead;
Topuna was killed too, and Hitchinna. A great many tried to kill
Howichinaipa; but he dodged all the time, dodged so well, so quickly
that not one of all his enemies could hit him. Jihkulu helped
Howichinaipa; never stopped fighting for a moment.

They fought all the way to Hwitalmauna just south of Jigulmatu; the
battle there was very hard, and people fell on both sides. There are
many rocks at Hwitalmauna now, and these rocks are the Mapchemaina
killed in that first battle.

Ahalamila's friends fought hard against Jihkulu and spent many arrows,
but could not hit him, for he had a robe of rabbit skin around his
body.

"We must hit that Jihkulu, we must kill him," said Ahalamila's
friends.

"You need not talk like that," said Jihkulu; "you cannot kill me. I am
the best fighter in all this world. I have been in every part of it;
no one has ever hit me, no one has ever hurt me."

Jihkulu shot at Jewina, but missed. "You can't hit me!" cried Jewina.
Jihkulu shot off Jewina's coyote skin, and then he killed him. Jewina
had dreamed a long time before that if he wore coyote skin in battle
he would not be killed, and that was why he wore it; but when Jihkulu
shot off the skin, he killed him easily.

Now Jupka was lying in the sweat-house on Jigulmatu, and he heard the
noise and shouting at Hwitalmauna. "They are fighting; I must stop the
battle!" cried he. So he ran south--rushed into the middle of the
fight.

"I want both sides to stop!" shouted Jupka.

The battle was at an end right there; all followed Jupka to Jigulmatu.
That evening he said, "You will hunt in the north to-morrow." All were
in the sweat-house then and were listening. Jupka spoke to them some
time, and then they all talked at once; it seemed as though the house
would burst when they were talking.

Next day they found deer in the north, and found them in plenty. Each
had one to bring back to the sweat-house. When they were coming home
through thick brushwood, Popila wished to please Ahalamila's friends,
and made himself a bear to kill Howichinaipa, who fought the day
before with Ahalamila and killed him.

The bear came out and threw his arms around a clump of brush in which
Howichinaipa was. Howichinaipa slipped out in time and ran. The bear
rushed after him, hunted him, and almost caught him at a rock near
Hakamatu. Howichinaipa sprang on to the rock and said,--

"I am nearly dead; I wish this rock to open; I am too tired to run; I
can go no farther."

The rock opened, and Howichinaipa dropped in. The bear rushed up,
stuck his head and fore paws after Howichinaipa; but the rock closed,
and the bear was caught and killed.

Howichinaipa came out and stood beside the bear. "I am tired," said
he. "I was almost dead. You tried your best to kill me, but I am hard
to kill." Then he took his flint knife, cut around the bear's neck and
behind his two fore paws, and skinned him, put the skin on his
shoulder, and started for Jigulmatu. He came behind the others,
reached home at dusk. He hung the skin near the door, and said,--

"We shall hear what Ahalamila's friends will say to-morrow morning."

Popila's mother heard what her son had done, and when she saw the
bearskin she cried and rolled upon the ground. Next day the old woman
was sweeping; she swept out a little red-eared boy, a Pakalai Jawichi,
and as she swept, he squealed. Popila Marimi took him up, took a
deerskin, and made a blanket of it, and put the little fellow in this
deerskin. She boiled water then with hot rocks and washed him, and
every time she washed she sprinkled flint dust on the little boy to
make him strong. He could creep around next morning; but she said:

"Stay in one place; you must not move. There may be poison in some
place; if you touch it, it will kill you. Stay right where I put you."

The second day the boy could talk. "You cry all the time, grandmother;
why do you cry?" asked he.

"Do not ask that question, grandson; it makes me grieve to hear you.
All my people were dead except my son; now he is killed and I have no
one."

The fifth day the boy was walking around the house outside.

"Grandmother," said he, "make a great fire."

She made a fire in the sweat-house. The boy stood near the central
pillar and sang, "Hála watá, hála watá."

He fell asleep while sweating; slept till morning. Next day when he
woke he said to his grandmother, "What am I to do with my hands?"

The old woman gave him a flint knife and said, "I have had this a long
time; take it now and fix your hands with it."

His fingers were joined together as far as the first joint, and she
showed him how to separate them from each other. He cut the little
finger first, then the third, the second, and the first. The thumb he
called big finger; and when the five fingers were separated and free
of each other, she told him to call the thumb the big finger, and call
it one, the next two, the next three, the next four, and the little
finger five.

This was the first time that counting was ever done in the world. And
when Jupka made the Yana, he gave them hands like Pakalai Jawichi's.

When his left hand was finished, Pakalai Jawichi said, "I don't know
how to cut with my left hand."

The old woman helped him to free the fingers of the right hand. When
all his fingers were free, the boy was able to shoot, and he wanted a
bow and arrows.

The old woman brought all the bows of her dead kindred; he broke all
but one, which had a string made from the shoulder sinews of a deer.
He took that and went out. This day Howichinaipa hid himself in a
cedar-tree: he was watching a bird. Pakalai Jawichi knew that he was
there, and called with the voice of the bird that Howichinaipa was
watching. Howichinaipa came down on the tree lower and lower, looking
to see where the call came from.

Pakalai Jawichi was hidden in a tree opposite, where Howichinaipa
could not see him; he kept calling, and Howichinaipa kept coming down.
Pakalai Jawichi had a good sight of him.

"If I hit him in the body," thought he, "the arrow will not hurt him;
I must hit him in the outside toe."

He did that, and Howichinaipa fell to the ground wounded. Pakalai
Jawichi pinned him to the earth with one arrow, then with another;
pinned his two sides to the ground with two rows of arrows. Pakalai
Jawichi ran home.

"Oh, grandmother!" cried he.

"What is the matter?" asked the old woman; "you came near falling into
the fire."

"There is some one out here; I want you to see him."

The old woman took her cane and followed Pakalai Jawichi.

"Do you see that person lying there?"

The old woman looked, and saw the person who had killed her son, saw
him pinned to the earth. She was so glad that she cried, she dropped
down then, and rolled on the ground; after that she jumped up and
danced around his body, danced many times, danced till she was tired.

"Hereafter," said Pakalai Jawichi, "everybody will call you
Howichinaipa. You will be a person no longer; you will be only a
little bird, with these arrow-marks on both sides of your breast."

He became a little bird then and flew away, the little bird which we
call Howichinaipa.

Next morning after the second hunt Jupka heard loud shouting in the
east; a great Mapchemaina had thrust his head above the edge of the
sky. This person had beautiful feathers waving on his head. Jupka had
made him shout, and he said to him,--

"Every time you rise up and show yourself to the people of Jigulmatu
you must shout in that way."

This great person in the east had two dogs; they were small, but very
strong. "Which of you is coming with me?" asked he that morning. "I
want a good dog; I am always afraid when I travel in the daytime."

"I will give you a name now," said Jupka to this person in the east.
"All people will call you hereafter by the name which I give now. The
name which I give you is Tuina. You will be known always by this name.
And your name," said he to the dog, "will be Machperkami."

When Tuina was ready to start, he made his small dog still smaller,
very small; put him under the hair on the top of his head, and tied
him in there.

When all dressed and ready, with the dog fastened in his hair, Tuina
became as full of light as he is in our time. Before he was dressed
and armed and had his dog on his head Tuina had no brightness, but
when he started he filled this whole world with light, as he does now
in the daytime.

Bohkuina had made a road for Tuina to travel on; he had made this
road in the sky, and Tuina went straight along to the west by it, till
he reached the great water. When he was ready to plunge into the
water, a hatenna (grizzly bear) of the water was coming out and saw
him. Tuina put his hands out and motioned with his arms as if they
were wings, motioned as if to jump in.

"Tuina is coming!" said the grizzly bear of the water. "It will be too
hot here if he comes. Let us make ready and go to high mountains. We
cannot stay here if Tuina comes."

A great crowd of water grizzlies came out of the ocean and went away
to the mountains. Tuina jumped into the water, and it rose on all
sides, boiled up, rolled away over the shore, every kind of shell of
the ocean went to land at the same time.

Tuina went far into the water, way down to the bottom; he went through
the bottom, deep under the water and the ground, and returned to the
east.

Long before that Jupka had made a road under the earth for Tuina to
travel on, a road back to the east. Jupka turned the earth bottom
upward, and made this road right through from west to east; and before
Tuina started Jupka said to him,--

"I have made a road, a straight road under the earth for you, a good
road; there are no rocks on it, all is smooth. Bohkuina made the road
on the sky, the road from east to west for you to run on; I made the
road down below, the road under the earth from west to east. When you
reach the east, you will rest a while, rise in the morning, come up
and go west again on the road which Bohkuina made; you will do this
every day without failing; you will do this all the time."

When Jupka stopped talking, Tuina went west, went back in the night on
Jupka's road; and so he does always.

The day after Jupka had talked with Tuina, given him his name and his
work, he said, "I will make Yana now, and I will give them a good
country to live in."

He took buckeye-sticks, broke off a large number; he wished to lay
them down on the top of Jigulmatu and make Yana. He put down the first
stick and said, "I will call this one Iwilau Yana" (Yana of the middle
place).

When he had said these words, a man rose up before him, a Yana.

"You will stay here in this middle country," said Jupka. "You will be
chief."

Jupka put down another buckeye-stick, and it became a Yana woman at
Jupka's word. He put down a third stick, which became a boy.

"This is an orphan without father or mother," said Jupka; and he
called the boy Hurskiyupa.

Jupka put other buckeye-sticks, a large number of them, around the
first Yana, the chief, and made common people. They all stood around
the chief and Jupka said to them,--

"This is your chief; he will tell you what to do; you must obey him
and do what he commands."

"Now," said Jupka, "what will the people of the middle country eat?
what shall I give them?" and he thought a while. "You will eat
clover," said he, "and roots. I will give you sticks to dig these
roots. You will eat fish, too, and venison. Eat and be strong, be good
Yana people. When the chief wants a deer, he will call you together
and say, 'I wish to eat venison; I want you to go out, I want you to
hunt deer and bring home venison to eat.' You must obey the chief
always."




NOTES


The following notes are put in as condensed a form as possible. They
are confined to explanations of the actors or characters in the myths,
and to information concerning the meaning of names of persons and
places.

The myths from one to nine inclusive are Wintu, from ten to the end
Yana. These two nations, though neighbors, are not related; their
languages are radically different.

       *       *       *       *       *

In 1895 I made a journey to California in consequence of an
arrangement with the late Charles A. Dana, editor of "The Sun."
According to this arrangement, Mr. Dana was to publish on consecutive
Sundays such myth-tales as I might think of sufficient value to appear
in his paper. Those myths were to be found by me in California,
Mexico, and Guatemala.

I began at the source of the Sacramento River, and worked down to the
mouth, my last stopping-place being the extensive hop-fields in the
lower valley.

In San Francisco I wrote the following short account of the Wintus.
That done, I set out for Mexico.

In the city of Guadalajara I copied the myths obtained in California
and sent them to "The Sun." After that I worked at "Quo Vadis," the
greater part of which I translated in Guadalajara.

All the myths in this volume were published in "The Sun," and appeared
as a part of a series pertaining to Indians in California, Mexico, and
Guatemala.

Only the California part has been published thus far.

After leaving Guadalajara I spent almost a year in Guatemala and
Chiapas, the southernmost state of Mexico. Among the last places which
I visited was Palenque. A view of one part of the ruins of this
remarkable and mysterious city appears as a frontispiece to the
present volume.


THE WINTUS

The Wintus are a nation or stock of Indians who before the coming of
white men owned and occupied all that part of California situated on
the right bank of the Sacramento, from its source near the foot of
Mount Shasta to its mouth at the northern shore of San Francisco Bay.

These Indians extended into Trinity County on the west, and still
farther to the mountain slope which lies toward the Pacific. Only a
small number of them, however, were on the western declivity. The
great body of the nation lived on the eastern slope of the Coast Range
and in the Sacramento Valley. Some of their finest mental productions
are connected with the upper course of the Sacramento and with the
MacCloud River, or Wini Mem.

It is difficult to determine what the Wintu population was half a
century ago, but, judging from the number of houses in villages, the
names and positions of which have been given me by old men, I should
say that it could not have been less than 10,000, and might easily
have been double that number. At present there are not more than 500
Wintus in existence.

The Wintus have suffered grievously; great numbers have been killed by
white men, others have perished by diseases brought in by strangers;
but those who remain are strong and are more likely to increase than
diminish. Times of violence have passed, and the present Wintus are
willing and able to adapt themselves to modern conditions.

It may be of interest to readers of these myth tales to know something
of the present condition of the Wintus.

In 1889, when I was in California, commissioned by Major Powell for
the second time to make linguistic investigations among various tribes
of the Pacific coast, a few Wintus came to me in Redding, California,
and complained of their wretched condition. There was not a spot of
land, they said, where they could build a hut without danger of being
ordered away from it. "This country was ours once," added they, "but
the white man has taken all of it." I told them to bring their people
together, and invite also the Yanas, who had suffered more than all
other people of that region, and then explain to me what was needed.

The two peoples met on a little stony field in a brushy waste outside
the inhabited part of Redding. There they made speeches and discussed
matters for three hours the first day and as many the second. They
gave me all the points of what they wanted, which was simply that the
United States should give each man of them a piece of land, with help
to begin life on it. I jotted down in brief form what they had told
me, read it to them, and they were satisfied. Next day the paper was
copied in the form of a petition from the two nations to President
Harrison. They signed the petition before a Redding notary, and gave
it to me with a request to lay it before the President.

Early in 1890 I was in Washington. Anxious to win the case of my poor
Indian friends,--or "Diggers," as some men are pleased to call them
contemptuously,--I looked around for a Congressman of influence to go
with me to support the petition before the President. I found no
suitable person till I met my classmate and friend, Governor
Greenhalge of Massachusetts, at that time a member of Congress. When
he heard the tale of the Yana massacre and realized the sad plight of
the Wintus, he offered at once to cooperate with me. He went to the
President and explained the affair to him. Two or three days later he
accompanied me to the White House. I gave the petition to President
Harrison, who promised to favor it with his executive initiative. He
did this so earnestly and with such emphasis that an agent was
appointed very soon to find land for those Indians. The agent found
land for them in various places, but within the radius of their former
possessions. The condition of the Wintus at present is this: They have
lands which are described, but in most cases the boundaries are not
indicated by any material mark, or at least very few of them are;
white men are trespassing, and it is impossible for the Indians to
protect themselves till their boundaries are fixed tangibly. They will
not have the means to begin serious work till they receive assistance.
They are waiting now in hope that the Commissioner of Indian Affairs
will have their lands surveyed, and that Congress will make a small
appropriation for their benefit. This is the extent of their hopes and
wishes. They are very glad to have land, and the majority of them will
make fairly good use of it. When I met them in 1895, they were very
grateful for the part which I had taken in settling them in life,
adding that they could not have settled themselves unassisted. As to
me, I cannot but make an emphatic acknowledgment of the generous and
effective aid given by Governor Greenhalge.

"Olelbis," the first myth published in "The Sun" (March 29, 1896),
was preceded by the following brief introduction:--

The Wintus, with whose creation-myths I begin this series, are a very
interesting people. Their language is remarkably harmonious, rich, and
flexible. It has great power of describing the physical features of
the country in which it is spoken, as well as the beliefs and ideas of
the Wintus themselves.

The picture of Olelbis, a being who lives in the highest and sees
everything, is drawn more distinctly and with more realism than any
character in other American religious systems, so far as I know.

The theory of creation evolved by the Indians of North America is
complete, simple, and symmetrical. I have referred to it somewhat in
the introduction to "Hero Tales of Ireland," in "Myths and Folk-lore
of Ireland," and in "Myths and Folk-tales of the Russians, Western
Slavs, and Magyars." This theory is in brief as follows:--

There was a people in existence before the present race of men; in
speaking of the present race of men, the tales have in view Indians
only. This first people lived in harmony for a period of indefinite,
unimaginable duration, without division or dissension,--undifferentiated,
so to speak. This was the golden age of existence, a Nirvana preliminary
to life as we know it at present, a Nirvana of the gods, as the Buddhist
extinction of self is to be the Nirvana of just men when all shall be one
in all and one in one. At last a time came when character appeared, and
with it differences and conflicts. When the conflicts were past and the
battles fought out, the majority of the first people were turned into all
the animated things, walking, creeping, crawling, swimming, flying, that
have ever been seen on the earth, in the water, or in the air. They were
turned also into trees and plants of every kind,--some into heavenly
bodies, others into remarkable stones and rocks, just as, in the Bible,
Lot's wife was turned into a pillar of salt.

According to this theory, every individual existence which we see in
the world around us is a transformed or fallen god. Every beast, bird,
reptile, fish, insect, or plant was at one time a divinity of high or
low degree, an uncreated person who had lived in harmony with his
fellows from the beginning till the time when variety of character,
or individuality, appeared and brought with it difficulties, or
perhaps we might say, penalty. With individuality came conflicts; when
those conflicts were over, creation was finished.

At the end of each particular conflict the victor turned by means of a
word the vanquished into that which embodied and expressed his
character. The vanquished on his part had a similar compelling word,
and changed his opponent into the beast, bird, or other existence
which described him; in other terms, he gave his opponent the physical
form, the outward personality, which corresponded to the nature of his
hidden or at least his unapparent character. Besides these
metamorphosed or fallen divinities, there is in the Indian mythologies
a group, a small minority, which was not changed, but left this world
going out under the sky at the west to live in harmony and delight;
and they live in that way to this moment. Sometimes this group, or a
part of it, went to live above the sky.

The Indian Creation-myths all relate to the adventures and exploits of
the "first people,"--the gods; none relate to human beings, and none
touch on anything done since man appeared on earth. They are the
accounts of what took place when there was an order different from the
present, and explain how the present order rose from the first.

Such, in substance, is the foundation of American religious systems,
and the method of all of them, so far as examined. The Wintu is
different from many others in its methods and details, but the result
is the same in all cases. Olelbis, with few exceptions, disposes of
the first people, retains with himself whomsoever he likes, sends to
the earth and transforms those whom he thinks more useful below than
above, and gives the example of a single ruling divinity which,
without being represented as all-powerful or all-wise, manages through
the knowledge and services of others to bear rule over all things.


OLELBIS

This myth contains a complete statement concerning the beginnings of
Wintu belief. Olelbis occupies the first place in the estimation of
Wintus. To understand the Wintu mind, it is indispensable to begin
with Olelbis. Other myths illustrate this one, explain parts of the
Wintu system, and help to explain the mental life of the people; but
this tale of Creation is to Indians of the western half of the
Sacramento valley what their sacred books are to historic races.

No Wintu has been converted to Christianity; hence the faith of the
nation is undimmed, and its adherence to primitive religion
unweakened. I cannot explain their position better than by giving the
words of one of the most intelligent Wintus whom I have met. After I
had collected all that I could find, and had received needful
explanations as far as was possible, I spoke some time with this man.
Referring to their religion and ideas, he said: "When I talk of these
things, I am afraid, I feel kind of scart" (scared).

That explains their position perfectly. Their faith is of the firmest;
they are full of awe; they believe that Olelbis is up there now in the
"Central Blue," in his marvellous Panti Hlut, the most beautiful
structure in the universe, and from there sees everything that
happens. That heavenly house is framed of living oak-trees, which bear
acorns continually, the Indian bread of life,--that house which has in
and around it all the flowers that have ever bloomed, flowers whose
roots can never die.

Winishuyat, mentioned in "Olelbis" and in other tales, is one of the
most interesting personages in Wintu mythology. He is described as a
little man, about the size of a thumb, and is always placed on the top
of the head by the person whom he accompanies and aids. This person
never fails to tie his own hair over Winishuyat, and thus conceals him
from every stranger. Winis means "he sees;" the literal significance
of huyat I have not been able to get at satisfactorily thus far. The
essential meaning of the whole word is that he sees in mind the
approaching danger before it is evident to the physical eye.
Winishuyat means, therefore, the prescience of danger,--seeing danger
while it is yet at some distance; not necessarily distance
geographically, for the danger may be present, but concealed in the
breast of a dissembling enemy, and some time, short or long, may be
between it and actual happening.

The peculiar thing in the case is that foresight is separated from the
hero, and is made the distinguishing quality of his little thumb-sized
attendant, just as if each power had to be connected with a
person,--no person having more than one great trait of character.

In the Yana mythology there is no name corresponding to Winishuyat,
but the same office is filled by a maternal uncle.

In the tale of "Juiwaiyu," Jupka, the uncle of the hero, makes himself
as small as a thumb, and is tied in under the hair of his nephew. In
the winning of Paiowa, at the house of Tuina, Igupatopa performs for
his sister's son the same kind of service rendered by Winishuyat,--with
this difference, that he is more active; he is not merely an adviser,
he is a helper, a strengthener; he gives counsel to make his nephew
wise, and then enters into his heart to fortify him, to render him
brave and strong.

It is curious and instructive to note in European Folk-tales the
survival of Winishuyat and his approximate equivalent, the Yana uncle.
In Slav tales this person is the mangy, miserable, neglected little
colt which, when taken outside the town, shakes itself and becomes a
marvellous magic steed, golden-haired, untiring, and wise, faithful to
its master as the sun to his course in the sky.

This steed knows what is coming, knows exactly what to do, knows the
mistakes that his master is sure to commit, knows how to correct them;
and the cumulative effect of these corrections increases immensely the
momentum of the final triumph.

The Tom Thumb of nursery tales, the mentor of his big brothers, gives
also a striking reminder of Winishuyat.


MEM LOIMIS

This beautiful myth, in which wind and water are the moving
characters, needs little if any explanation, save in one point, that
relating to the Hlahi, commonly called doctor by white men. The word
Shaman used in Siberia describes his position accurately. He is not
the master of spirits exactly, but he is the favorite and friend of
one or of more spirits; that is, of such spirits as promised him their
co-operation at the time when he became a Hlahi. If this person
observes the rules of life that are always imposed on him who enjoys
the friendship of this or that spirit (these rules refer mainly to
food agreeable to the spirit), and does what is needful when the
spirit is invoked (the needful, in this case, includes smoking and
dancing), together with chanting the song of this spirit (every spirit
has its own song), the spirit will come at his call.

Sanihas Yupchi smokes and dances; the Tsudi girls sing or chant. The
name Sanihas Yupchi means the archer of Sanihas; Sanihas means
daylight or the entire light of day from dawn till darkness,--in other
words, all the light that Sas the sun gives between one night and
another,--though Sanihas, daylight, is always represented as a person,
and not the product of Sas's activity. This Sanihas Yupchi, the archer
of daylight, the usher of the dawn, is no other than Tsaroki Sakahl,
who has a white stripe on his back, the messenger who was sent by
Torihas to invite Katkatchila to the hunt which caused the burning of
the world in "Olelbis." He appears also as the envoy who ran in
darkness on the gleaming sand trail to invite Hawt to Waida Dikit's
green and red house, where the world concert was held, at which Hawt
proved to be the greatest musician in existence.

In the note to "Kol Tibichi" will be found an account of how the Hlahi
receives the aid and co-operation of spirits.

Most interesting beliefs are connected with Wokwuk, the son of Olelbis
and Mem Loimis. The Wintus believe Wokwuk to be the greatest source of
power and wealth.

According to "Olelbis," different bits of Wokwuk came down to the
earth and were turned into elk and various valuable creatures; the tip
of Wokwuk's little finger became the earthly Wokwuk.

Wintus told me that if a man were to see the earthly Wokwuk, who was
made from the tip of Wokwuk's little finger, he would grow immensely
rich from the good luck which the sight would bring him. The last
Wokwuk seen appeared a little over a hundred years ago. The story of
its appearance is as follows:--

One day an old woman at a village called Tsarken, about twenty miles
north of Redding, went for wood. Soon she ran home almost breathless,
leaving her basket behind.

"Oh, my grandson," cried she to the chief, "I am frightened. My
grandfather and grandmother used to say to me when I was a girl, 'You
will see a wonderful thing some day.' I have just seen something
wonderful on the hill. I believe it is a Wokwuk. Old people told me
that if a Wokwuk is seen he will stay in one place a long time. I
think this Wokwuk will stay, and wants us to see him."

The chief made a beautiful shed of small fir-trees, covered it with
fir branches, and placed sweetly smelling herbs in it; he sent for
neighboring chiefs, and next day all went in their best array to the
Wokwuk, bearing water in the finest basket of the village, and
carrying a large oak slab and a rope. They found the Wokwuk facing
north, and went near him. The chief lighted his pipe, blew the smoke
toward every side, and said to the Wokwuk,--

"You have come to see us; we have come to salute you. You have come to
show yourself. You are a great person, and all the Wintus in the
country will hear of you; all the chiefs in every place will speak of
you. I am glad that you are here. I am glad that you have come to my
country."

He talked more to the Wokwuk; spoke very nicely. Next he took water in
his mouth and blew it around in every direction. After that the chief
smoked a fragrant root instead of tobacco, blowing the smoke toward
the Wokwuk, speaking to him with great respect.

"Now we will take you home with us," said the chief. They carried the
oak slab to the Wokwuk; he did not stir. They pushed him onto the
slab, tied one leg to it, then took him home, placed the slab in the
shed, and untied the Wokwuk. He remained two months there, never ate
anything, never tried to escape.

Every morning they talked to the Wokwuk. During two months no one went
to hunt, no one ate venison or sucker fish. Finally, all the Wintus
were invited and all the Yanas,--a great assembly. They saluted the
Wokwuk, each chief addressed him; last of all came a chief from Wini
Mem, named Tópitot, leading a black bear. This bear walked erect like
a man. He had bands of porcupine quills around his fore and hind legs,
and a buckskin band covered with the red scalps of woodpeckers around
his head. The bear bowed down to the Wokwuk, and the chief addressed
him. When other chiefs spoke to the Wokwuk during the two previous
months, he never raised his head or gave a sign of answer; but when
Tópitot had finished, he raised his head and gave out a sound which
was loud and long.

Next morning the chief of the village wished good luck to all, then he
brought a rope, hung Wokwuk to a tree, and took his life. He plucked
him, gave the quills to the chiefs, including himself, cut off the
head, kept it; the body he carried to an ant-hill; when the ants had
taken all the flesh, the bones were separated from each other and
given to each chief.

When the chiefs went home, they spoke to the quills and bones as if
praying, at first every morning, then once a week, then once a month,
and continued this for a long time. After that each put away his bone
or his quill in a triple covering. The bone or feather was wrapped
first in a cover of the red scalps of woodpeckers sewed together;
outside that were two mats made of reeds.

The owner of a Wokwuk bone or quill does not show it to any one, not
even to his wife or children. When he dies he leaves it to a son, or,
if he has no son, to a daughter. The possession of Wokwuk relics gives
luck, but the owner must never eat venison or sucker; these are
offensive to Wokwuk.

Five years after the quills were put away only the stems of them were
left; five years later they were as fresh as if just plucked. If the
quills were to be exposed before people, the people would all die; if
to one person, that person would perish.

The owner of a quill or bone unwraps it occasionally, places water
near it, and talks to it, saying: "Give us good luck; make us well. I
give you water, you give us strength." If he points the relic and
mentions a person's name, saying, "Make him sick," that man will die
surely.

If the owner of a Wokwuk relic dies without heirs, the bone or quill
is sunk in a sacred spring; if it were buried with the owner, all
would get sick and die.

Both feathers and bones grow old in appearance, and later on they are
as fresh looking and perfect as ever.


NORWAN

Next to "Olelbis" stands "Norwan," both for value and interest. This
remarkable myth recalls forcibly the Helen of Troy tale, both in its
general plan and in many particulars.

The great war among the first people is caused by the woman Norwan.
Norbis Kiemila, who claims to be her husband, is descended from the
heavenly white oak which forms part of Olelpanti Hlut, the divine
mansion in the "Central Blue."

Norwan's full name is Pom Norwan en Pitchen, that is, daughter of the
land on the southern border. She has another name: Hluyuk Tikimit,
which means the dancing porcupine. Her residence, or hlut, was Norwan
Buli, Norwan Mountain. The Yana name of this mountain is Wahkanopa,
which means the son of Wahkalu. Wahkalu is Mount Shasta, and Wahkanopa
Lassen's Butte.

Norwan, or Hluyuk Tikimit, the dancing porcupine, has still a third
name, Bastepomas pokte, the food-giving or food-producing woman. In
her quality of producer she occupies a position in Wintu mythology
similar to that of the divine descendant of the earth and the sun in
the Algonkin religious system. This Algonkin myth is one of the most
beautiful and significant, not among creation, but among action myths.
And here I beg to call attention again to the distinction which I make
between the two classes of myths.

Creation myths relate always to what was done among the "first people
in the world which preceded this," while creation was going on, or
more correctly, perhaps, during the time of those transformations or
metamorphoses from which resulted the present world and the order of
things contained therein.

Action myths relate to ever-recurrent processes in nature which began
as soon as the sun had his course marked out for him and the physical
world around us received its present form and fashion; this happened
before all the "first people" were metamorphosed. The vast majority
had received the physical bodies which they have at present, but a few
were left, and they remained in various places till they saw or heard
the new race, the Indians. Action myths, therefore, relate to various
processes in nature which never cease. For us the most important are
those involved in the relations between the sun and the earth.

The great Algonkin sun and earth myth which has many variants and vast
wealth of detail, describes those relations more profoundly and
broadly than any other Indian myth devoted to the same subject.

The Algonkin myth in its most extended form describes the earth maiden
as becoming a mother through being looked at by the sun. She gives
birth to a daughter who is called Wakos ikwe, the fox woman; this
daughter becomes the mother of a great hero, the highest benefactor of
aboriginal man in America. He is the giver of food and of every good
gift by which life is supported.

Of this myth there is a shorter version in which the hero is born of
the earth directly; he is her son, not her grandson.

This benefactor and food-giver is no other than that warm air which we
see dancing and quivering above the earth in fine weather. Descended
from the sun and the earth, this warm air supports all things that
have vegetable or animal existence.

This myth in its more extended form, the one to which I have referred
first, is similar to that which Schoolcraft pieced together and which
Longfellow took as the foundation of his beautiful poem "Hiawatha,"
though not identical with it.

Schoolcraft, with his amazing propensity to make mistakes, with his
remarkable genius for missing the truth and confusing everything with
which he came in contact, gave the name Hiawatha to his patchwork.

Hiawatha is an Iroquois name connected with Central New York. The
Iroquois were mortal enemies of the Algonkins, and the feud between
these two stocks was the most inveterate and far reaching of any in
America. It was, in fact, the only Indian tribal hatred that rose to
historical importance, and it was by the adherence of the Iroquois,
the "Five Nations" of New York, that English dominion in North America
was established.

The Algonkin force of America was on the French side, but the Iroquois
held all water communication between Lake Erie and Ontario, the
greatest strategic position on the continent at that period. They cut
the Algonkins in two, and prevented France from receiving their
undivided assistance.

Had the whole Algonkin power aided the French, they would have had
great chances of victory. Had the Iroquois been friends of the
Algonkins and acted with them, there could have been no doubt of the
triumph of France at that juncture. But the Algonkins and Iroquois
were mortal enemies; the Algonkins were friendly to the French, the
Iroquois to the English.

In the face of all this Schoolcraft makes Hiawatha, who is peculiarly
Iroquois, the leading personage in his Algonkin conglomerate; Hiawatha
being an Iroquois character of Central New York (he is connected more
particularly with the region about Schenectady), while the actions to
which Schoolcraft relates him pertain to the Algonkin Chippewas near
Lake Superior.

It is as if Europeans of some future age were to have placed before
them a great epic narrative of French heroic adventure in which Prince
Bismarck would appear as the chief and central Gallic figure in the
glory and triumph of France. The error and absurdity would be, as the
Germans say, _colossál_, but not greater or more towering than in
Schoolcraft's Hiawatha. Longfellow, of course, could not free himself
from the error contained in his material; but the error, which was not
his own and which he had no means of correcting at that time, did not
prevent him from giving his work that peculiar charm which is
inseparable from everything which he did.

In the original Algonkin myth the hero to which Hiawatha has been
accommodated was a child of the sun and the earth. Whatever his names
in the numerous versions found in the twenty-eight languages of this
richest and most varied Indian stock of North America, he is always
the bounteous benefactor of man, the kindest of all divine powers that
have ever appeared upon earth. He is always in reality that warm light
which dances and quivers before us in fine weather, and through which
every man, beast, reptile, insect, fish, bird, and plant lives and
flourishes.

This myth has received on the Pacific coast, or more correctly on
parts of it, a different treatment from that given it east of the
Rocky Mountains. There the benefactor is a female, a daughter of the
earth. Nothing is said as to who her father was. It is significant
that she dances all day, that she is called the quivering porcupine
and the food-producing woman.

In Indian myths from New York to California the porcupine is ever
connected with light; in some cases it is the sun himself. In
"Tulchuherris" of this volume, Sas (the sun) carries a porcupine
quiver, and is advised never to lay it aside, for as long as he keeps
it on his shoulder he is safe from his children the grizzlies (the
clouds) who wish to kill him.

In California Norwan, daughter of the earth, occupies in part the
place of the Algonkin hero, the child of the sun and the earth. Her
usual life is of the housekeeping order; she has great supplies of
food in her hlut, or residence, and she goes on dancing each day until
evening. The great and characteristic event of her life, her departure
from the dance with her partner, is of the same scope and meaning as
the last journey of Hiawatha when he sails to the west and vanishes in
the regions of sunset. The hero of the Algonkin myth must go, he
cannot stay; he must vanish in the ruddy glow of evening because he is
the warm dancing air of the daytime. He must go whether he will or
not. Before he goes, however, he cheers all whom he leaves behind by
telling them that another will come from the east to take his place
and comfort them. Next morning, of course, the comforter comes, for
the life career of the Algonkin hero is included in the compass of a
single day, and a successor is bound to come as surely as he himself
is bound to go.

Norwan dances, and then goes away with her partner, to the desperate
vexation of Norbis Kiemila, her would-be husband, who wishes to have
her to himself exclusively. She dances, as she says, without knowing
it and goes away unconsciously. She dances with this partner because
she cannot help it, and departs imperceptibly to herself.

Who are the rivals for her person?

Norbis means "living in the south;" he lives in the southeast, the
land of greatest productiveness, in the region of Hlihli Piu Hlut Ton,
that most beautiful of houses on earth, and second only to the divine
mansion in the "Central Blue." He is descended from one of the white
oaks in the heavenly house.

The person who was metamorphosed afterward into the red wiu bird (Tede
Wiu) is his rival, the person with whom Norwan left the dance, thus
causing the first war in the world. Was this person the red of evening
which became Tede Wiu afterward? If we acknowledge that he was, and if
we are willing to admit Norbis as the representative of all people
living east of the west, we have at once the two parties to an
irreconcilable rivalry in the most vital of questions, the possession
of warm sunlight, and that most vital of questions is embodied in the
person of a woman. That was the cause of the first war in the world
and of fell strife. A story substantially the same as this was, we may
think, the ultimate basis of the Iliad. The mythic origin of the
particular tale from which Homer constructed his epic had been
forgotten, that may be granted, but there is little doubt that in
rustic Greece men might have found a similar tale which was mythologic
beyond peradventure; and the Helen of that tale, or her equivalent,
was a person like Norwan. With the materials at our command even now,
we have enough to indicate this, for was not Helen the daughter of
Leda and the divine swan, a person to be fought for with all available
energy in the world at that period, and to be fought for in a war
which surpassed in importance all that have ever succeeded it?

Helen of Troy, the daughter of Leda and of Zeus, the overarching
heaven, with all its light; Norwan, daughter of the earth, with
Lassen's Butte, California, for her residence; and the Algonkin hero
whose place is taken by Hiawatha, are all different representatives
of the same person, different expressions for the same phenomenon; and
that person or phenomenon is the warm air which dances above the earth
in fine weather. This air, in one case noted here, is conceived as the
greatest benefactor of man, that being who gives the choicest and most
necessary gifts to all, and, in the other two cases, as a priceless
treasure, in the form of a woman who is to be fought for with all the
valor that can possibly be summoned, and in a manner that in Helen's
case inspired the noblest epic known to the world thus far.

These three cases show clearly the methods of mythology, and prove the
absolute need of knowing that we must deal (to borrow mathematical
language) with constants and variables taken together,--knowing
clearly, meanwhile, which are constants,--and not with variables only,
supposing them to be constants, or with constants and variables mixed
together without being able to distinguish which belong to one class
and which to the other. Were some writer to deal with the prehensile
capacity in animated creatures, and describe how it is exercised, he
would find a variety in the organs used for grasping things which
would represent very well the variety of methods employed by primitive
man in mythology to represent the same phenomenon or force in nature.

If man be considered as standing on his hind feet, his fore feet (the
hands) are his grasping instruments. With the elephant the nose is
prehensile; with some monkeys the tail performs this office, in part
at least. With tigers and lions, dogs and cats, the mouth and teeth
are prehensile instruments of great force and precision. With the bear
the forepaws are almost hands. The two feet with their talons, which
correspond to the hind feet in quadrupeds, are the graspers with birds
of prey, working instruments with domestic fowl, and weapons with some
other birds, as, for instance, the ostrich.

Take another case, the teeth, one office of which is to reduce food to
fine particles; with all mammals they serve this purpose, and, in many
cases, others also. Birds have no teeth, but they have a substitute in
the gizzard, which they line with gravel and other hard particles; and
this second stomach, by contraction, grinds to pulp grain and other
food already softened in the crop or first stomach. The
boa-constrictor has no teeth and no second stomach; it chews by
crushing between its body and a tree the beast which it is to swallow.
The chewing mouth of the boa has for one jaw the tree, for the other
its own body; between those two jaws it reduces to a soft mass the
carcass of the creature to be swallowed.

In considering the various personages in mythology, it is all
important to discover, first of all, what they are, and, next, what
they do. The office filled by a certain personage in a group of myths
belonging to a given race or tribe may be filled by an entirely
different kind of character in a similar set of myths of another
tribe. This results sometimes from different geographic and climatic
conditions, and sometimes from looking at the phenomenon or process of
nature in another way. There is as much variety in the treatment of
one subject by various tribes as there is variety in prehensile
members and the use of them among grasping creatures, or as there is
difference in the manner of reducing food to fineness among
quadrupeds, birds, and boa-constrictors.


TULCHUHERRIS

Tulchuherris resembles certain European tales more than any other in
this collection. Apart from other merits, the value of such a tale in
comparative mythology is evident.

The old woman, Nomhawena, is an earthworm now; the Indian tale-teller
says that there is no doubt on that point. Pom Pokaila, her second
name (Pom, earth; Pokaila, old woman) admits of two translations,--old
woman of the earth, or old woman Earth. In the first case it would
apply to Nomhawena, who digs the earth always, is a woman of the
earth; in the second, it would mean the earth itself. The earth is, in
fact, Tulchuherris's mother. Nomhawena is his grandmother, in a
titular sense at least. In more countries of the world than one,
grandmother is the title of a midwife; and the office of midwife was
performed by Nomhawena at the birth of Tulchuherris.

We may picture to ourselves the scenes and circumstances of
Tulchuherris's birth. Root Flat is one of those level places where
innumerable little piles of fine soil are brought to the surface by
the labor of earthworms. Over this valley, as over so many others on
the Pacific coast, fog is spread after sunrise,--fog which comes up
from the earth dug in every direction by Nomhawena's people. In this
fog is Tulchuherris, the mighty son of the earth; in other words,
lightning, electricity, that son of the earth who comes to maturity so
speedily.

Kulitek Herit, brother of Tulchuherris, for whom Nomhawena mourned so
deeply, is now the white feather which appears sometimes in the black
tail of the black vulture. Komos Kulit is the Wintu name of this
vulture. There were three great feathers among the Wintus,
transformations of three great persons among the first people. The
first of these is the white feather just mentioned, which is the
metamorphosed Kulitek; the second is the longest black tail-feather of
the black vulture, which is the present form of Hamam Herit, who
fought in the Norwan struggle; the third is the longest wing-feather
of the same vulture. This feather is the metamorphosed Tubalus Herit.

The first two feathers are used on great occasions in war; the third
feather, only by doctors or Hlahis.

In Indian mythology there is a subtle, but close and firm, connection
between the sunflower and the sun, which is illustrated strikingly in
this story. The old woman, by her magic art, burns great piles of big
trees in two or three minutes, while a handful of sunflower roots is
beyond her power and keeps the fire alive for years. This
illustration, in the material world, of the Indians, reminds one of
the still, small voice in the spiritual world of the Hebrews. The
sunflower root in this Tulchuherris tale is invincible from its
connection with the sun, the one source of light and heat; the still,
small voice is considered almighty because of its connection with the
whole moral life and light that exists in the universe.

The two obsidian knives in Sas's house are an interesting reminder of
the Damocles sword.

In the case of Tichelis, now ground squirrel, and Hawt, the present
lamprey eel, we have cases of personal collision resulting in
transformation. In the Wintu mythology this is exceptional, and in
this instance one-sided, for the vanquished make no attempt to
transform Tulchuherris.


SEDIT AND THE TWO BROTHERS HUS

Sedit was in favor of death for men, and gives his reasons. It cannot
be said that he brought death into the world, but he stopped the work
which would have kept it out.

His discourse with the Hus brothers is curious; it represents the
immortality and goodness of a weak and limited creature like man as
barren and monotonous. The comparison of this conversation with the
account of Adam and Eve before and after the Fall is not without
interest.

The critical, unbelieving, disobedient Sedit, who is so willing to
make life in the world varied and interesting through death, so long
as the question stands apart from his own immortality, and his great
concern and anxiety when he thinks that he must himself die, is
brought out in good relief.

The earnest and honest Hus brothers stand in strong contrast to the
sneering Sedit. The Hus character is a lofty one in Wintu mythology.
This may seem strange to a new student of Indian ideas, when he
remembers what a foul creature the turkey buzzard is.

The buzzard is considered as a purifier on earth, and surely in
regions like Central America the service rendered by the bird in this
regard is memorable. The buzzard is everywhere the most frequent and
striking figure in Guatemala and Southern Mexico, both in city and
country. In California there is a fine of five dollars for killing
one.

The original Hus character is conceived by the Wintus as striving
toward religious purification as strenuously as the earthly buzzard
works at cleaning the earth of carrion of various descriptions.

The following remarks accompanied this tale when published in "The
Sun":--

This tale of Sedit and the Hus brothers is a splendid bit of
aboriginal American philosophy, and touches on topics which have
exercised many minds besides those of primitive America. The subject
of life and death is treated here so simply, and at the same time so
well, that I believe few readers would ask for explanation or comment.

Some statements, however, touching Sedit are not out of place, I
think. The coyote is very prominent in the mythology of every region
where he is found. The basis of his character is the same in all myths
that I have collected. He is a tremendous glutton, boastful,
talkative, cunning, exceptionally inclined to the other sex, full of
curiosity, a liar, a trickster, deceiving most adroitly, and is
deceived himself at times. He comes to grief frequently because of his
passions and peculiar qualities. He is an artful dodger, who has
points in common with the devil of European folk-lore, being in many
cases an American counterpart of this curious and interesting
personage.

Of Northern Pacific coast tribes in the United States, the Modocs have
given most distinction to the coyote. Among them the chief coyote is a
trickster on the grandest scale, and has obtained possession of the
indestructible disk of the sun, through which he is immortal, or, at
least, is renewed every day to carry that luminary. Because of his
vanity and boastfulness, the coyote undertakes various enterprises in
which he fails through his passions.

Sacred springs and small lakes in the mountains are very prominent in
the Modoc religion. A young man who hopes to be a magician or a doctor
goes to these mountain springs before he is married or knows woman.
There he fasts and watches a week or longer until he is nearly
exhausted. If he is to be a magician or doctor, spirits appear to him
in this interval. A coyote went to those mountains (in the time before
men were on earth, of course), hoping to gain great magic power, but
on the way he ate various kinds of food hateful to the spirits of the
springs. These spirits were disgusted with the odor of food that came
from him, struck him with mange, drove him away, made him hungry,
foul, and wretched forever. He ran away, howling and lamenting,
without hope of pardon. From this coyote are descended an especially
bad breed of coyotes in Oregon. They are all foul and hungry to this
day. In dark windy nights the mangy descendants of that glutton are
heard bewailing the fault of their ancestor, their own fallen state
and lost happiness.

The Shasta Indians have a long tale of a coyote whose fond grandmother
tried to make him a great sorcerer. When the time came, she sent him
to the sacred mountain and gave every instruction. He was not to stop,
eat, or drink on the road, or to speak to any one. When about
two-thirds of the distance, he passed near a house; inside was loud
thumping and hammering; a frog woman was pounding seeds and singing;
her house was full of food; coyote caught the odor of it, stopped,
could not resist the temptation to go in. He went in, ate and drank
everything put before him. In Indian mythology frog women are not
vestals; so breaking his fast and gluttony were not his only offences.
He had fallen past redemption. On leaving the frog woman's house he
went through a series of unmentionable adventures, at the end of which
there was nothing left but his head, which was in a pool by the
wayside, and just as much alive as ever.

Two sisters, afterwards ducks, who were going that way, found and
pitied the unfortunate. It was not easy to carry him, but the younger
promised to do so if he would shut his eyes and not open them till she
set him down on his grandmother's threshold. This condition was to
prevent him from seeing how she carried him. When half-way home,
curiosity overcame him. Though only a head, he opened his eyes and
fell to the ground.

The duck woman had pity again, and took him to his grandmother. Loud
was her wailing at sight of her lost and ruined grandson.

Sedit came to grief through peculiarities of character.


HAWT

This myth of Hawt is very curious and subtle; it is one of the best
told tales that I have found anywhere. There is a largeness about it,
and, at the same time, a perfectly firm grasp on the part of Waida
Dikit, the master of the assembly, that produce a grand effect.

Though the story is long, it needs, I think, no explanation beyond
what is stated in the introduction and in preceding notes, except some
remarks touching the character of Hawt.

Hawt, the great musician, is identified with water; he is, as it were,
the spirit of water made visible.

In this myth, only the musical powers of Hawt are exhibited; but in
the Yana Tirukala, which means the same thing as Hawt (lamprey eel),
we see the active side of the same personage, we see him as a worker.
Original is Hawt indeed,--a living flute fingering his own body as he
would an instrument; inhaling air and blowing it out through the
apertures in his sides.

The present lamprey eel has marks, as it were, of holes in his sides.


NORWANCHAKUS AND KERIHA

This tale contains actions and a number of personages difficult to
identify, because their names are merely epithets. Eltuluma means "he
swims in;" but who it is that swims in we know not. Keriha seems
connected with ducks, from the fact that he wore a duck-skin all his
life on earth, and, when he threw off this skin, all ducks were
produced from it.

Norwanchakus means the southern end of that staff or stick to which
was attached the net with which these two brothers dragged Pui Mem and
Bohema Mem, and named each place from the thing which came into the
net in front of it.

Nodal Monoko (the little man who ate so many salmon and sturgeons, and
carried so many away in his bag) means "sweet in the south." He has
another name, Nodal Wehlinmuk, which means "salt in the south." At
first he is hostile to grizzly bears, but later has intimate relations
with them and marries one. His acts point strongly toward electricity
or lightning. His bag, in which the whole world could be put away, may
well have been a cloud bag.

Norwinte means "seen in the south;" but, again, we have no knowledge
of the person seen. Poni Norwanen Pitchen, the full name of Norwan, is
also an epithet meaning "daughter of the land on the southern border,"
and would convey no information if it stood alone; but as Norwan, in
addition to many other details, is also the dancing porcupine and the
food-producing woman, we know who she is.

The existence of Puriwa and Sanihas (darkness and daylight) before the
sun was in the world, is most interesting. This is one of many proofs
that every phenomenon was considered to be independent. Daylight is a
personage quite apart from the sun, who is merely that old Sas who
fought with Tulchuherris, and who travels through the sky every day
from east to west in utter loneliness. He carries that glowing torch
which we see as he moves on his way through the sky; but the light of
day is a separate personage. Similar considerations apply to Puriwa,
darkness or night, who is also a distinct and independent entity.

The struggle between Keriha and Hubit has much charm for Wintus; they
laugh heartily at the recital of it.


KELE AND SEDIT

Old Kele, the mountain wolf, is evidently one of the first people sent
down from the sky by Olelbis; not in part, but in person. His sons and
daughters were not his children, but his creation; he made them from
sticks, just as Jupka made the Yanas at Jigulmatu.

In the note to "Kol Tibichi" is a Wintu account of the character and
actions of Kele's sons and daughters. A very interesting and valuable
account this is; it explains the werewolf idea perfectly. The wolf man
of Northern Europe, the _Lykanthropos_ of the Greeks, must have been
just such a person as Kele's sons and daughters, who were people
apparently when they went forth to harm Indians, but who turned into
wolves when they were discovered and rebuked. At home, in their great
sweat-house, those people are wolves; but when they go out on their
travels up and down through the world, they are exactly like Wintus,
save only the hairy foot.


KOL TIBICHI

In connection with this tale I add the following remarks about one of
the two modes of making doctors, and about certain spirits. These
remarks are given, as nearly as possible, in the form of the original
Wintu narrative.

I have added, besides, the songs of four great existences, or gods.
Every individual existence in Indian mythology has its own song. This
song refers to what is most notable in the actions or character of
that existence. The given song is sung by a doctor immediately after
its spirit of that existence has entered him.

Kol Tibichi's yapaitu (yapaitu is another name for one of the first
people), the rainbow, would not leave him till he used a woman's red
apron as a headband, because the rainbow is connected with the
catamenial periods of Sanihas (daylight).

The yapaitu dokos (yapaitu missile), mentioned further on, is a
projection of the spirit itself of the yapaitu. Sometimes it flees
from the patient; the duty of the doctor, in such a case, is to find
the dokos. If he does not, it may return to the sick man after the
doctor has gone; and in that case the last condition of the patient is
worse than the first. Generally, however, it waits to be cast out.


THE MAKING OF DOCTORS AMONG THE WINTUS

The chief assists always in this ceremony, because a doctor can be
made only in a sweat-house. Two chiefs may consult together and agree
with old doctors in this matter, or one chief may do so if it suits
him. If doctors begin, they must consult the chief, because he owns
the sweat-house. The doctors and the chief or chiefs agree upon the
time, and then give out the news that on a certain night they are
going to create doctors. Young persons who wish to be doctors go to
the sweat-house; most of the old people stay at home.

The men heat the sweat-house, shut it up closely, and sit down. Sweat
pours from them like rain. When they have sweated sufficiently, all go
to the river and swim. After that the people, men and women, go into
the sweat-house. One doctor or two will begin to sing. Young unmarried
men or women who are candidates present themselves. The doctors suck
out of these all that is bad in them, all that is impure, unclean.
They suck the forehead, breast, back, arms. At times they suck out
blood; at times something sharp like a fine bone comes out. They suck
out everything that is evil. When they have finished sucking, the
doctor sings again, and puts a yellowhammer's feather into each ear of
the candidate. The feather may go in out of sight, or the doctor puts
it on the person's head, and the feather may sink through his skull.
Now the people dance, and especially the candidates for the dignity of
doctor. The chief goes out, stands on the housetop, and calls to all
the yapaitu in the rocks, in the water, in Olelpanti, in the trees, in
bathing springs, to come. "We are going to make doctors," says the
chief; "you must come and help my people."

After this the chief goes in, and they close every hole, every chink
in the sweat-house; close them all safely. There is no fire, no light,
inside. When they have begun to talk in the sweat-house, one doctor
calls to all the spirits of yapaitu in the east, west, north, south to
come. Pretty soon a spirit may be heard on the housetop; spirits make
a whistling noise when they come. That moment a man or woman falls
down, and all know that the spirit has gone into that person's head.

Now the doctor calls, "One more; one more!"

In a moment another whistling may be heard as the spirit touches the
housetop and goes in. Another man or woman falls; the spirit has
entered that one. The persons into whom spirits have entered know
nothing. They become as if crazy, as if they had lost their wits. They
try to go to the housetop. Some try to climb the central pole; some
want to leave the sweat-house; they know nothing for half an hour
perhaps.

One doctor keeps on calling spirits, and they come one at a time. Many
doctors may be made in one night, or a few, or none. There are always
many people in the sweat-house to whom spirits will not come. The
spirits never go into people unless they like them. The spirit looks
straight through a man and knows him immediately.

The people dance all night. There is no light in the sweat-house; the
place is very hot, though there is no fire there. Next day those to
whom spirits have come tell the doctors and chief what spirits are
with them. If not, the chief may give them food offensive to the
spirits, and the spirits would kill them if they ate. Some spirits may
stay two or three days with a person, who would then sit inside all
the time. The old doctors have to ask this spirit what it wishes, and
make it go away for a time, so that the person possessed may eat
something. Each spirit has its own kind of food. If we give a man
something that the spirit has never eaten, it will kill him right away
if he eats. The old doctors ask his spirit what it wants, and it
tells. The salmon spirit, for instance, likes leaves or water; a
sucker of the mountains would eat mountain pine nuts, but a valley
sucker needs nuts off the digger pine. If strange food is placed
before a spirit, it is afraid; and if the man possessed eats this
food, the spirit will kill him. Some spirits don't like buckskin, and
the man to whom they have come must not wear it.

The bad spirits are numerous; the sucker is one of these, and so is
Kele (the mountain wolf). This wolf is dangerous; it may hurt you in
this way: you may think that you see a good-looking man or woman on
the mountain or in the woods. If you go toward this person or this
person comes toward you, comes near you, speaks to you, and you agree
with it, the next thing you know this strange man or woman turns into
a wolf, runs away, and your mind is gone; the wolf has taken it. The
sucker does the same, but disappears before your eyes or turns into
something ugly.

There are three causes of sickness. The first is when a good yapaitu
spirit is angry with a man and strikes him with his spirit point;
second, when a bad spirit puts his missile in a man and makes him sick
(the spirit in this case does it at his own instance); third, when an
evil spirit sends his missile into a man at the request or prayer of a
doctor.

When the dokos or missile that has been sent into a man is drawn out
by the spirit which assists the curing doctor, the doctor forces the
dokos to tell what yapaitu sent it, and at the prayer of what doctor.
But the dokos does not tell the truth in every case, and sometimes
accuses the wrong person. It is very difficult, therefore, to know
surely what doctor is guilty of making a man sick. A doctor, if the
spirit is in him when he comes to see a sick man, is able to look
right through the body of the patient and see where the dokos lies.
Sometimes he is not able to draw it out; he can see where the dokos
is, that is all; but if his spirit were stronger than the one who put
it there, he could draw it out and cure the patient.

There is danger, however, in drawing out a very powerful dokos by
sucking, for when it is coming out of the sick man's body it may be
sent down through the mouth of the doctor into his body by the spirit
who owns it, and the doctor is killed in this way.

A doctor may have twenty or thirty spirits, but he rarely calls on
more than two or three, and it is seldom that any great number are
fitted to work together in a given case.

The office of doctor is very dangerous, especially if the doctor is
powerful. If he has many spirits to help him, each has to be pleased
in its own special way; each has its own food, prefers certain kinds,
and dislikes others. The doctor must not eat food hateful to his
spirits: if he does, he is liable to be killed. A man who has twenty
or thirty spirits is greatly limited, therefore, in his manner of
living.

Some spirits do not like venison, others do not eat fish; the doctor
who commands these spirits must eat neither venison nor fish, and so
with other kinds of food in the case of other spirits.

The man who seeks to be a doctor cannot choose his spirits; they come
to him; he cannot refuse to receive them, and must live in a way to
please them.

Every dokos can be extracted from a sick man's body by the aid of a
spirit stronger than the one who put it in.

Among other spirits, doctors have the spirit of the sun, the spirits
of stars and the clouds to help them. These are good spirits. Sedit's
spirit cannot help doctors much. They call it sometimes, but it
doesn't do much; it has not the power. Suku (dog) is very powerful and
bad. If Suku wants to kill a man, he does it quickly. A doctor who has
the Suku spirit in his service is great. If a man has been made sick
by Suku, he will vomit blood, or bleed from his nostrils all the time.
The Suku spirit is a good one to send to kill people. Chir (the sucker
fish) is an evil spirit too. When Chir wants to kill a man, it makes
him giddy and crazy right away. He becomes senseless and dies, unless
some doctor cures him, and generally doctors can do nothing against
Chir. The Chir sickness is the worst that spirits bring. It is called
chiruntowi, sickness from the sucker. The man who has it dies; he
cannot tell where he is troubled; he grows dizzy and senseless. No one
can cure him unless by great luck. Something tried by some doctor may
save him--just by chance, just because it happens so. Kele is also an
evil spirit. He has a song, the same which his two daughters sang on
the mountain top (see the tale "Kele and Sedit"), and which Sedit
heard far away in the west. This is a poison song, and draws people
after it. Kele is here now, suppose, in Cottonwood or in Tehama, and
sees a man up at Yreka. Kele sings, and the song goes as straight as a
string to the man. It draws him and draws him; he is drawn as water is
when people pump it. The man must follow the song; he has got to do
so, he cannot help himself, he is sick; his sickness is called
lubeluntowi (sickness from lubelis). The man will keep going and
going and going; he will not know what makes him go. Suppose I am
listening to Kele's song. I go, and it is the song that draws me. I
hear it; but nobody else does. The spirits of the Kele girls drew
Sedit to them; he couldn't help himself, he couldn't stop; he had to
go, and he never went home again; he had to stay up at Kele's. The
spirits of Chir and Kele always make people crazy.

Many Wintu women lose their minds, and are killed by Kele's sons. Many
Wintu men have been lost through Kele's daughters. Suppose I am out
here in the wood, I see a woman coming, a nice woman. She stops and
talks; I talk to her. If I have sense in me, I look at her toes to see
if she is one of those Kele women. If she is, she has a bunch of hair
on the tip of her foot, and if I see it, I say right there, "You are a
Kele!" At these words she will leave me and run. When ten feet away,
she will turn to a mountain wolf, and I shall see that Kele running
away very fast.

Suppose some woman is out in the woods. She is thinking of some man
that she likes, and right away she sees the very man she is thinking
of. He is coming to meet her. He comes up and asks, "Where are you
going?" The woman is glad to see him. She tells. He carries her to the
mountain, and never again will that woman be seen by her friends or by
others. It was one of Kele's sons who took the form of the man she was
thinking of, so as to entice her away and destroy her. If the woman
has sense she will look down at the foot of the stranger, see the tuft
of hair, and say, "You are Kele; go off." He turns to a wolf on the
spot, and runs away to the mountain. All Wintus went barefoot in old
times, and this tuft could be seen, if a person had sense enough left
to look for it. As every one wears shoes or moccasins now, it might
not be easy to find it. But to this day the Keles lead people astray.
All the Wintus know them, and are afraid.

They live on Wenempuidal, a high mountain near the left bank of the
Little Sacramento. Dekipuiwakut, a small creek, comes down from Kele's
Mountain and falls into the Sacramento. White men call it Hazel Creek.
The Keles live at the head of this creek. The whole mountain is their
sweat-house. They are up there now, and almost any night you may hear
them howling on the mountain when the evil brothers are going home.

The following four spirit songs are from my Wintu collection. Two I
give in the original, with literal translation; the other two, in
translation only. The lightning song, by referring to the connection
between lightning and the sucker, which has one of the most formidable
spirits, enables us to suspect why the sucker is so much feared by
Wintus. In the Olelbis song, the great one above is the
cloud-compeller, as in classic mythology. The tanning is described in
"Olelbis." In the Hau song, the celestial Hau is described as
travelling along the Milky Way. This is the Wintu comment on the text.
Many readers will agree, I think, that the Polar Star song, the
fourth, is composed on a scale truly immense. The lightning song
sounds wonderfully like an extract from the Sanscrit, "Rig Veda."


SONGS OF SPIRITS

1. Walokin tsawi, Lightning's Song.

          Mínom tóror wéril chirchákum sáia
          Dúne wérem winwar dún bohémum.
    I bear the sucker-torch to the western tree-ridge.
    Look at me first born (and) greatest.

2. Olelben tsawi, the Song of Olelbis.

        Olél bohéma ni tsulúli káhum síka ni.
    I am great above. I tan the black cloud (there).

3. Song of Hau (red fox).

      "On the stone ridge east I go.
      On the white road I, Hau, crouching go.
    I, Hau, whistle on the road of stars."

4. Song of Waida Werris (the Polar Star).

    "The circuit of earth which you see,
    The scattering of stars in the sky which you see,
    All that is the place for my hair."[5]

    [5] Hair in Indian mythology, as in other mythologies, is the
    equivalent of rays of light when connected with the sun and with
    planet luminaries.


THE YANAS

As a preface to the few myths of the Yanas which have survived, I beg
to offer the following words touching this ill-fated people:

Previous to August, 1864, the Yanas numbered about three thousand, as
I have been informed on the sound authority of reliable white men.
Taking the names and population of villages given me by surviving
Indians, I should say that this estimate is not too large.

During the second half of August, 1864, the Yanas were massacred, with
the exception of a small remnant.

The Indians of California, and especially those of Sacramento Valley,
were among the most harmless of human beings. Instead of being
dangerous to settlers, they worked for them in return for fair wages.
The Yanas were distinguished beyond others for readiness to earn
money. White men occupied in tilling land knew their value, and
employed them every season in haymaking and harvesting.

At the present day the Wintus, and the few Yanas that are left, go
down the valley and labor during the season in hop-fields and
vineyards.

Why were the Yanas killed?

The answer is as follows: Certain Indians lived, or rather lurked,
around Mill Creek, in wild places somewhat east of Tehama and north of
Chico. These Mill Creek Indians were fugitives; outlaws from various
tribes, among others from the Yanas. To injure the latter, they went
to the Yana country about the middle of August, 1864, and killed two
white women, Mrs. Allen and Mrs. Jones. Four children also were left
for dead by them, but the children recovered. After the murders the
Mill Creeks returned home unnoticed, carrying various plundered
articles with them.

Two parties of white men were formed at once to avenge the women and
four children. Without trying in any way to learn who the guilty were,
they fell upon the Yanas immediately, sparing neither sex nor age.
They had resolved to exterminate the whole nation. The following few
details will show the character of their work:--

At Millville, twelve miles east of Redding, white men seized two Yana
girls and a man. These they shot about fifty yards from the village
hotel. At another place they came to the house of a white woman who
had a Yana girl, seven or eight years of age. They seized this child,
in spite of the woman, and shot her through the head. "We must kill
them, big and little," said the leader; "nits will be lice."

A few miles north of Millville lived a Yana girl named Eliza,
industrious and much liked by those who knew her. She was working for
a farmer at the time. The party stopped before this house, and three
of the men entered it. "Eliza, come out," said one of them; "we are
going to kill you." She begged for her life. To the spokesman, who had
worked for her employer some time before, she said: "Don't kill me;
when you were here I cooked for you, I washed for you, I was kind to
you; I never asked pay of you; don't kill me now."

Her prayers were vain. They took Eliza, with her aunt and uncle, a
short distance from the house and shot the three. My informant counted
eleven bullets in Eliza's breast.

After this murder the party took a drink and started; but the leader,
in killing Eliza, said, "I don't think that little squaw is dead yet."
So he turned back and smashed in her skull with his musket. The man
who counted the bullet holes in her bosom, himself a white man, saw
her after the skull was broken. He knew the girl well, and gave me
these details.

Another party went to a farm on Little Cow Creek where they found
three Yana men threshing hayseed in a barn. The farmer was not at
home. They killed the three Indians, and went to the house. The three
wives of the men killed in the barn were there and began to scream.
The farmer's wife hurried out with a quilt, threw it around the three
women, and stood in front of them, holding the ends of the quilt. "If
you kill them you will kill me," said she, facing the party. The woman
was undaunted, and, as it happened, was big with child. To kill, or
attempt to kill, under those conditions, would be a deed too ghastly
for even such heroes; so they went away, swearing that they would
kill the "squaws" later. These three Indian women were saved and taken
beyond the reach of danger by two white men.

And so the "avengers" of Mrs. Allen and Mrs. Jones continued. At one
place they killed an Indian woman and her infant, at another three
women. In the town of Cottonwood they killed twenty Yanas of both
sexes. The most terrible slaughter in any place was near the head of
Oak Run, where three hundred Yanas had met at a religious dance. These
were attacked in force, and not a soul escaped. The slaughter went on
day after day till the entire land of the Yanas was cleared. The few
who escaped were those who happened to be away from home, outside
their country, and about twelve who were saved by Mr. Oliver and Mr.
Disselhorst, both of Redding. The whole number of surviving Yanas of
pure and mixed blood was not far from fifty.

Some time after the bloody work was done it was discovered that the
Mill Creek outlaws had killed Mrs. Allen and Mrs. Jones, and that the
Yanas were innocent. The Mill Creeks were left unpunished.

My inquiries as to how civilized men could commit such atrocities
found the following answers:--

In 1864 there was a large floating and mining population in Northern
California, which "had no use for Indians," and was ready to kill them
on slight provocation. In distinction to these people was a small
number of settlers who lived among the Yanas in friendship, and hired
them to work on land. The killing was done by men who did not know the
Yanas. Those settlers who did know the Yanas were overawed, and were
unable to save them, except secretly, as in the case of the two men
who rescued the three women on Little Cow Creek by conveying them
beyond danger. Oliver and Disselhorst, who saved twelve, were at the
edge of Redding, where support was possible. At first the rage of the
killing parties was boundless; they swore that white women would not
be murdered again in that country, and that not an Indian should be
left alive in it. An intense feeling of indignation at the murder,
coupled with an unspeakable contempt for Indians, was the motive in
the breasts of most of the white men. Had they looked on the Yanas
with ordinary feelings of justice, they would have tried to find the
guilty instead of slaughtering a whole nation. There was another
element among the slayers of the Indians,--a vile one, an element
which strives to attach itself to every movement, good or bad in all
places--a plundering element. That year the Yanas had worked a good
deal, and it was not uncommon for single persons of them to have from
$40 to $60. One informant told me that a man showed a friend of his
$400 which he had taken from murdered Indians. Money and everything of
value that the Yanas had was snatched up by these robbers.

Nearly all the men who killed the Yanas have gone out of the country
or are dead. A few are in Northern California yet, and the children of
some of the dead ones are living there now. Though one's indignation
at the deeds of 1864 be great, there is no use in mentioning names at
this hour. All that is left is to do for the poor remnant of an
interesting people that which we have done for Indians in other parts:
give them land properly surveyed and the means to begin life on it.


THE WINNING OF HALAI AUNA

The Yanas were fond of astronomical myths, or myths of the upper
world. The morning star and the moon appear in them frequently. The
great sweat-house of the sun is the dome of heaven.

The name of the mysterious and mighty old uncle, Igupa Topa, seems to
me to be derived from Iguna, chief sweat-house, and Tuina or Toina,
the sun. Tuina is the prevailing pronunciation, but Toina is used
also. Igupa is the regular form of son of Iguna, as is Topa of Toina.
He is a person whose strength is well known to the sun, who has
evidently a clear perception of how dangerous a person he is.

The shooting of Wakara into the sky is a curious variant of the
tree-bending by Tulchuherris and Sas in the Wintu myth.


THE HAKAS AND THE TENNAS

This myth describes a deadly feud between the people who were turned
into flint, that is, fire, presumably lightning, and the grizzlies or
cloud people. After I had prevailed on him to give me the story, the
narrator told it with unfeigned delight. His sympathy with the old
woman Tsuwalkai was great, and his enthusiasm for Tsawandi Kamshupa,
who rose from the spittle of Tsawandi Kamshu, evident and striking.
The origin of Ilhataina in this myth and in the following called
"Ilhataina," which is the usual name for lightning, strengthens my
view that the Wintu Tulchuherris, a name which is merely an epithet,
meaning "dug up," is the same person as Ilhataina of the Yanas. The
regular acknowledged lightning of the Wintus is called Walokit, who is
a child of Wima Loimis, grizzly bear maiden, and the sun.


ILHATAINA

In this myth lightning is "dug up," as in the preceding one.
Electricity is one of the earth's children.

The putting on of Gowila's skin by Ilhataina is one of the curious
acts frequent in Indian mythology. In the Aztec worship of Mexico, in
Montezuma's time, the sacrificing priest put on the skin of the victim
as far as the waist.

The wish of Ilhataina to get the old rabbit-skin robe is worthy of
attention.


HITCHINNA

Among the Iroquois the cyclone was represented as a great head, the
name of which in Seneca is Dagwa Noenyent. This head would pass
through a forest and tear up the greatest trees by the roots.

The method used by the deceitful Metsi to rid the world of Hitchinna
might remind one of the way of cooking oysters at the waterside in
Virginia near the places where they are taken.


TIRUKALA

I have referred to Tirukala in the Wintu myth "Hawt." The battle
described in this myth and the child which rises from the spittle of
Burnt Face and reaches maturity in one day, are very striking.

Tirukala gives the active, the working side of water as a personage,
the widener of valleys, the pusher apart of mountains, the maker of
all streams and rivers. Tirukala works without ceasing, he sings as he
labors, and never eats food of any kind.

Hawt (in the Wintu myth) gives the artistic, the poetic side of the
same person, whose voice is that of Niagara and the raging ocean at
its loudest, that of the tiniest rivulet or of the raindrop at its
gentlest.


SUKONIA'S WIVES AND THE ICHPUL SISTERS

It is noteworthy that in Indian myths whenever two sisters are sent
somewhere, as in the present case, and warned by father or mother
against some deceiver who is likely to meet them on the way, the elder
sister is generally ready to become a victim, the younger is the wise
and obedient one, as in this myth.

We have again a case of putting on the skin of a slain person to
become like him or her.

The test of bringing water was perfect, since no one who was not of
the household could know where it was.


THE FINDING OF FIRE

In this, as in all Indian myths of the bringing of fire, it is
procured by stealing. The pursuit in all cases is most strenuous.

In one myth relays are posted along the road at short intervals; these
deliver the fire to one another in great haste. At last the pursuers
are very near, when the fire is given to him who afterward becomes the
turtle; he places the treasure in his mouth and rolls into a deep
river, where he hides till the baffled masters of fire turn homeward
sorrowing.


HAKA KAINA

Here we find another myth of a flint people.

In the Hakas and Tennas we have a struggle between the lightning and
the clouds. In Haka Kaina the myth represents the advance of spring to
colder regions. The swan-maidens go north with the early lightning of
the year. Hence Haka Kaina, the war chief of Wahkalu, the great
residence of Jupka, is represented as stealing them. In another myth,
of which, unfortunately, I have only a fragment, these same
swan-maidens are borne away north by Haka Kaina with great pomp and
circumstance. The chief is attended by an immense escort, in which all
the personages are phenomena of springtime. His regular force, his
trusty warriors do not migrate; they stay all the year at Wahkalu,
unless when absent on some expedition. The most characteristic person
in the escort is a species of poplar-tree, the leaves of which tremble
like those of an aspen. This hero dances all the time from his point
of starting in the south till he reaches Mount Shasta. This gives a
fine picture of that kind of tree putting forth leaves which quiver
with gladness at the approach of the swan-maidens.

The marshalling by Haka Kaina of forces so numerous that they surround
the immense base of Mount Shasta, the enormous dust which they raise,
dust which goes up to the sun, their death by fire at the hands of the
Mini Aunas, their resurrection and return home with the swan-maidens
and all the spoils of Hwipajusi's people, are conceived on a scale
truly grand.


TITINDI MAUPA AND PAIOWA THE YOUNGEST DAUGHTER OF WAKARA

Paiowa is the evening star. Wakara's most interesting daughters are
always Halaia, or Halai Auna, and Paiowa. The first is the morning,
the second the evening star.

Halaia's sister, Pahnino, in this myth became afterward a shell, or
rather a creature which lives in a shell, as did also her mother. I do
not know which kind of shell Pahnino is; it has bright colors.

The increase and decrease of food, the magic power of weapons, the
jealousy and hostility of the husbands of other sisters, are usual in
Yana myths of this kind.


THE TWO SISTERS HAKA LASI AND TSORE JOWA

Love of this sort, of a sister for a brother, is found in European
lore occasionally, and is, of course, a survival from a very remote
past. In this myth it is the love of one of the first people, a
female, afterward turned into a loon, for her brother, who was
afterward turned into a wildcat.

Bringing to life is one of the most familiar performances in American
mythology as well as in Keltic. In Yana it is done by kicking or
turning over a corpse with the foot; by boiling in water, sometimes
one hair, sometimes the heart; or by striking the corpse with a twig
of the red rose-bush. In Keltic it is most frequently done by the
stroke of a Druidic or magic switch, which resembles the Yana method
with the rose twig. The red rose has significance, no doubt. In
Keltic we are not told the kind of wood from which the Druidic switch
was taken.

In Seneca myths raising from the dead was very impressive. Sometimes
the dry, fleshless bones of hundreds and hundreds of the first people
were found lying in a heap or close together. The hero, another of the
first people, pushes a hickory-tree as if to throw it on them, crying
at the same time, "Rise up! or the tree will fall on you." That moment
all the dry bones sprang up, took on flesh, and assumed their old
forms immediately. Indian humor creeps out sometimes by giving us two
lame people of the uprisen company. In the hurry and rush, while the
dry bones are arranging themselves, two legs get astray; two
personages have each one leg which is his own and one which belongs to
his neighbor.


JUIWAIYU

This myth has many and very valuable elements,--the importance of
dreams, the stopping or slackening the course of the sun, the music of
Juiwaiyu as he moves, the choice of the right road, the storm of
vermin, Jupka as monitor and helper, the summons to send Damhauja's
daughters to meet him, the inexhaustible venison no larger than a
walnut, Juiwaiyu's marvellous music on the mountain, the bringing home
of countless deer in the body of a fawn, the race with Damhauja's
sons-in-law, the meeting with the poison spider, the rattlesnake and
the grizzly bear, the storm, the drowning of Damhauja and his
resurrection,--make this one of the richest of Yana tales.

Playing with two bones was very much like playing ball. Near both ends
of the field barriers were set up, and each side had to put the bones
past the barrier toward which they faced.

The starting-point was in the middle of the field, at an equal
distance from both barriers. At the opening of the game all the
players gathered at this middle point; the bones were thrown up, and
all struggled for them. Whoever caught the bones on his stick either
hurled them toward the barrier beyond which he wished to put them, or
he ran toward it, bearing them on the point of his stick. If there
were swifter runners than he, they took the bones from him, or if he
hurled them ahead, they ran and threw them or carried them toward one
barrier or another. The bones were fastened together by a string some
inches long.

In Yana tales, Damhauja, the moon during the last quarter, plays or
rather played, a great part. I say played, since, unfortunately, we
have but a fragment of Yana lore left after the events of 1864.
Damhauja's sons-in-law on the west side of the river, in this tale,
were various Mapchemaina people,--that is, beings who somewhat later
became beasts, birds, plants, rocks, and insects on earth. All the
stars were his children. His daughters, stars, were married to
Mapchemaina people, except the two of whom Juiwaiyu had dreamed. His
sons, stars also, lived near him, and were at enmity with his
sons-in-law.


THE FLIGHT OF TSANUNEWA AND DEFEAT OF HEHKU

It is not so easy to decide who Hehku is. Her most usual, if not her
regular and normal, form is that of a horned serpent; but she changes
herself into various forms. When angry, or rather when raging, she
becomes a Putokya,--that is, a skull person, like Hitchinna. These
Putokyas seem to be the cyclone or tremendous wind which moves in a
narrow path and makes a clean sweep of everything.

The gambling scene in Jupka's sweat-house is good. Hehku has easy work
till she meets the master, who to his incomparable power adds deceit.

The game, connected here with Jupka's sweat-house, is played by two
persons sitting opposite each other. One of these holds a small
"Jupaiauna" bone or stick in one of his closed hands, and the other
guesses which hand it is in. The process of playing is as follows:--

Each person has ten little sticks or counters at the opening of the
game. One holds the "Jupaiauna," and begins action by placing his
hands behind his back and deciding in which hand to hold the bone for
that time; next, he closes his hands firmly, and brings them out
before his breast. He holds them back downward, the little finger of
each hand touching that of the other. The person sitting opposite
guesses where the bone is; the other opens both hands then, and shows
his palms. If this bone is in the hand indicated by the guesser, he
wins; if not, he loses. A game is finished when one side holds the
twenty counters; that is, when one side has won the ten little sticks
given to the other at the opening of the game.

As Hehku sat with her back to the west, her right hand was south and
her left north. When her opponent guessed south, if the bone was in
her right hand she sang it into her left (the north),--literally,
enchanted it north. If the bone was in her left hand, she let it stay
there, and thus she won in every case.

Jupka, by limiting the game to one guess, and by his quibble of words,
proved himself a keener trickster than Hehku, whose predicament is
described fairly well by the Russian saying, "Kosá nashlá na kámen,"
the scythe met a stone; or the biter bitten, as we might say.


THE FIRST BATTLE IN THE WORLD AND THE MAKING OF THE YANAS

The beginning of this myth is somewhat similar to that of "Olelbis." A
messenger is sent to invite the Master of Flint to come and show the
Mapchemaina, or first people, how to kill deer. Kaltsauna, the owner
of flint, is like Katkatchila of the Wintus; he is transformed later
into a lizard. In character he is different, being old and testy
though liberal, while Katkatchila is affable, but wonderfully
tenacious of his weapon, and prizing it so highly that when the flint
is stolen he does not hesitate to set the whole world on fire.

Kaltsauna put the various kinds of flint in places where they are
found to this day, and taught the first people how to make arrow
points.

These hunts of the first people or gods are, for the Yanas, the great
prototypes of hunting. To this day all sorts of game are under the
control of certain spirits of the first people, whose favor is
essential to success in hunting.

The story of Howichinaipa's change into a little bird gives a good
case of forced metamorphosis, and also a good picture of the stern
spirit of Indian vengeance inherited from the first people.

Vengeance is a sacred duty which they were not free to neglect under
any consideration. "Vengeance is mine, saith the Lord, and I will have
it."

Machperkami, the tiny dog in the hair of Tuina (the sun), is an exact
substitute for Winishuyat of the Wintus.

The descent of Tuina to the lower side of the earth, his night journey
from west to east on the road made by Jupka, is described with clear
and precise brevity. There is no doubt as to the nature of the water
grizzlies who rise out of the ocean and go to the mountains at the
approach of Tuina.

The account of the creation of the Yanas is as concise as possible,
and at the same time complete.




WINTU PLACES MENTIONED IN THE MYTHS


    Bohema Mĕm                  Great water, Sacramento River.
    Bohĕm Bŭli                  Great mountain, Bald Mountain.
    Bohĕm Puyuk                 Great peak, Mount Shasta.
    Bohĕm Tĕhil                 Great Tehil.
    Bŭlibok Puyuk               Bulibok peak.
    Bŭli Puiwăkat               Eastern mountain slope.
    Dokŏs Hleï Púriton.
    Dau Paki Olĕl               Upper side of the dam, above the dam.
    Ĕlitsarauton                Root flat.
    Ĕl Hakam                    In the elbow.
    Halat Pom                   Grapevine land.
    Han Bŭli                    Fox mountain.
    Hĭn Pom                     Owl land, now Slate Creek.
    Hlĭhlĭ Puihlut Ton          Acorn eastern sweat-house place.
    Kahi Bŭli                   Wind mountain.
    Kaisansi Haraston           The road place of Kaisus.
    Kawikĕn                     Down in Kawi.
    Kĕri Bŭli                   Acorn mountain.
    Kĭlĭtcĕpĭn Kenharas         Arrow straightener's down-road.
    Kĭnwĭnĭs Pom                Looking down land.
    Lasan Holŏk                 Spider's house (or den).
    Lorŭs Pom                   Sandstone land.
    Miol Tapa                   Tree on the island.
    Mĕmnom Kalai                Southern water divide.
    Nomkĕn Kobalus Waimĕmton    Northern shell water place.
    Nomlopi                     Southern Lopi.
    Nophlut                     Deer's sweat-house.
    Nŏrken Mĕm                  Water down south, now Little
                                    Sacramento.
    Nŏrpat Kodiheril            Kodi village stand southward.
    Nŏrpuikĕn                   Down southeast.
    Nŏrwan Bŭli                 Norwan mountain.
    Nŏrwanbulihlut              Norwan mountain sweat-house.
    Nŏrwĭnte                    Seen in the south.
    Olpŭhlchĭton                Blowing upward, _i. e._ wishing place.
    Pantĭ Tsarau                Upper sand flat, now Fall River.
    Pas Puisono                 Nose (promontory) sticking out
                                    eastward, now Redding.
    Pĕnĕl Kĕntĕ.
    Pokaitĭn Mĕm                Woman's talk water.
    Pom Wai Hudi Pom            Land in the north, rumbling land.
    Puidal Pom                  Land far east.
    Puidal Wĭnnĕm               Winnem far east.
    Pui Mĕm                     Eastern water, now Pit River.
    Puitiĕl Ton                 In the eastern side (region) place.
    Pui Torŏr                   Eastern ridge.
    Saskĕwĭl                    Sas's dwelling.
    Sonŏmyai                    At the stones.
    Sawal Pom                   The bathing-place land.
    Sudi Sawal                  The Sudi bathing-place.
    Tayám Norél                 Waiting in the south, now Trinity
                                    Centre.
    Tcanahl Puyuk               White peak.
    Tĕdĕ Puyuk                  Red peak.
    Tĕhi Bŭli                   Tehi mountain.
    Tidŏk Waisono               Ant northern nose (nose-promontory).
    Tóriham Pui Torŏr           Eastern crane place.
    Tókŭston                    Rock ridge place.
    Tsarau Hĕril                Sandflat village, now Stillwater.
    Tsĭk Tĕpji                  White oak whirling-place.
    Waikĕn Pom Pui Humŏk Pom    The land down north, the eastern
                                    silent land.
    Waihola Puyuk               Northern pipe place.
    Waikĭdi Pom                 Northern Kidi land.
    Wĭni Mĕm                    Middle water, now MacCloud River.




YANA PLACES MENTIONED IN THE MYTHS


    Chupĭskoto                  Red rocks.
    Daha                        Great water, Sacramento River.
    Hakachímatu                 Blue and white flint place, Polecat
                                    Spring.
    Hakamatu                    Flint place, Buzzard's Roost.
    Hwitalmauna                 Whistling-place, Little Flat.
    Iwĭ́ljami                   Montgomery creek.
    Jamahdi.
    Jidjĭ́lpa                   Cedar creek.
    Jigŭ́lmatu                  Round place, Round Mountain.
    Juka Mapti.
    Kamshumatu                  Clover place.
    Kĕ́tmatu                    Poison place.
    Kurulsa Mauna.
    Motiri Mauna.
    Oáimatu                     A hollow mountain northeast of Round
                                    Mountain.
    Pawi                        Clover creek.
    Pulshu Aina.
    Wahkalú                     Mount Shasta.
    Wahkanopa                   Lassen's Butte.
    Wajami.
    Wakaruwa                    Wakara's (moon's) dwelling.
    Wamarawi                    A round mountain at Ball Creek.
    Wewauna                     Round place.




VALUE OF LETTERS IN THE LIST OF PLACES AND IN THE NAMES OF PERSONS
THROUGHOUT THE VOLUME


    A long  = a  in hate
    A short = o  "  not
    Ai      = i  "  bite
    Au      = ow "  now
    E long  = ai "  bait
    E short = e  "  bet
    I long  = ee "  beet
    I short = i  "  bit
    O long  = o  "  note
    O short = o  "  not
    U long  = oo "  boot
    U short = u  "  bull
    J       = our J
    H       = German ch

All other consonants have the same value as ours.

All short vowels are marked with ̆; the long are unmarked.

When the Indian meaning of names is known, I have given it before the
present name of the place given by white men. When the name given by
white men stands alone, it indicates that the Indian meaning is
uncertain or unknown.

Names accented on the penult have no accents printed on them; all
others have printed accents.




MYTHS AND FOLK-LORE OF IRELAND.

BY JEREMIAH CURTIN.

_With Etched Frontispiece. Crown 8vo. Cloth, gilt top, $2.00._

The myth tales included in this volume were collected personally by
the author, during 1887, in the west of Ireland,--in Kerry, Galway,
and Donegal,--and taken down from the mouths of men who, with one or
two exceptions, spoke only Gaelic, or but little English and that
imperfectly. To this is due the fact that the stories are so well
preserved, and not blurred and rendered indistinct, as is the case in
places where the ancient Gaelic language, in which they were
originally told, has perished.

CONTENTS.

    Introduction.
    The Son of the King of Erin and the Giant of Loch Léin.
    The Three Daughters of King O'Hara.
    The Weaver's Son and the Giant of the White Hill.
    Fair, Brown, and Trembling.
    The King of Erin and the Queen of the Lonesome Island.
    The Shee an Gannon and the Gruagach Gaire.
    The Three Daughters of the King of the East and the Son of a
        King in Erin.
    The Fisherman's Son and the Gruagach.
    The Thirteenth Son of the King of Erin.
    Kil Arthur.
    Shaking-Head.
    Birth of Fin MacCumhail.
    Fin MacCumhail and the Fenians of Erin in the Castle of Fear Dubh.
    Fin MacCumhail and the Knight of the Full Axe.
    Gilla na Grakin and Fin MacCumhail.
    Fin MacCumhail, the Seven Brothers, and the King of France.
    Black, Brown, and Gray.
    Fin MacCumhail.
    Cucúlin.
    Oisin in Tir na n-og.

[Decoration]

NOTICES.

Mr. Curtin is the first to give to the public a volume of Irish
popular tales which _may justly be ranked with the best recent
collections of popular tales in Germany, France, and Italy.... A
delightful book alike for the scholar and general reader_.--_The
Nation._

I have now read the whole of your "Irish Myths," with perhaps one
exception, and I compliment you most heartily upon the book. _It is
wonderfully fresh and suggestive, and in the mere capacity of a lot of
fairy stories it ought to have a big circulation._ Fin MacCool and the
Fenians of Erin were great fellows anyway.--_Charles A. Dana._

A contribution to the literature of the subject which is of the very
first importance.... The stories are wonderfully fresh and distinct,
and they are pervaded with a most rare and delicious humor.--_The
Beacon._

A more thoroughly delightful book has not come to hand for many a long
day. Its tales have, in the first place, the genuine ring of original
myths, the true ring of folk-lore, that indescribable naïveté which is
as charming as it is inimitable.--_Boston Courier._

No more interesting or more valuable contribution to the literature of
this subject has ever been made.... The tales in this book are very
charming. They cover a wide range, and to adults as well as to
children of tender years they are simply fascinating.--_Quebec
Chronicle._

The work of the collector is not only performed faithfully, but with
such intelligence that the stories have a value in literature worthy
of being added to the Norse sagas and other tales of wild adventure
and myths.--_Boston Journal._


HERO-TALES OF IRELAND.

BY JEREMIAH CURTIN.

_Crown 8vo. Cloth, gilt top, $2.00._

The tales included in this volume, though told in modern speech, relate
to heroes and adventures of an ancient time, and contain elements
peculiar to early ages of story-telling. The chief actors in most of
them are represented as men; but we may be quite sure that these men
are substitutes for heroes who were not considered human when the
stories were told to Keltic audiences originally.--_Introduction._

CONTENTS.

    Elin Gow, the Swordsmith from Erin, and the Cow Glas Gainach.
    Mor's Sons and the Herder from Under the Sea.
    Saudan Og and the Daughter of the King of Spain; Young Conal
        and the Yellow King's Daughter.
    The Black Thief and King Conal's Three Horses.
    The King's Son from Erin, the Sprisawn, and the Dark King.
    The Amadan Mor and the Gruagach of the Castle of Gold.
    The King's Son and the White-Bearded Scolog.
    Dyeermud Ulta and the King in South Erin.
    Cud, Cad, and Micad, Three Sons of the King of Urhu.
    Cabal, Son of King Conor, in Erin, and Bloom of Youth, Daughter
        of the King of Hathony.
    Coldfeet and the Queen of Lonesome Island.
    Lawn Dyarrig, Son of the King of Erin and the Knight of Terrible
        Valley.
    Balor on Tory Island.
    Balor of the Evil Eye.
    Art, the King's Son, and Balor Beimenach, Two Sons-in-law of King
        Under the Wave.
    Shawn MacBreogan and the King of the White Nation.
    The Cotter's Son and the Half Slim Champion.
    Blaiman, Son of Apple, in the Kingdom of the White Strand.
    Fin MacCool and the Daughter of the King of the White Nation.
    Fin MacCool, the Three Giants, and the Small Men.
    Fin MacCool, Ceadach Og, and the Fish-Hag.
    Fin MacCool, Faolan, and the Mountain of Happiness.
    Fin MacCool, the Hard Gilla, and the High King.
    The Battle of Ventry.

[Decoration]

OPINIONS.

These are thrilling hero-tales. No extract can do the stories justice.
Any one taking up the volume will not be likely to lay it down without
reading it.--_The Cincinnati Commercial Gazette._

Mr. Jeremiah Curtin, whose translation of the novels of the great
Polish novelist, Sienkiewicz, introduced him to English readers, has
shown equally admirable skill in rendering into English many ancient
hero-tales of Ireland. The stories are marvels of exaggeration, and
have a genuine Irish flavor. Champions, giants, fairies, and witches
work their wonders and spells in a fascinating way.--_The Outlook._

The people of this country ought to be grateful to that accomplished
American scholar, Jeremiah Curtin, for the translations from varied
and quite dissimilar foreign languages which he has added to our
literature. His version of the wonderful novels of Sienkiewicz opens
up to us a most interesting department of history, of which
English-speaking people have hitherto been profoundly ignorant; and
his latest publication, "Hero-Tales of Ireland," is perhaps quite as
valuable, with the added charm of a wild, delightful, primeval Celtic
imagination.--_The New York Sun._


MYTHS AND FOLK-TALES OF THE RUSSIANS, WESTERN SLAVS, AND MAGYARS.

BY JEREMIAH CURTIN.

_Crown 8vo. Cloth, gilt top, $2.00._

CONTENTS.

    RUSSIAN MYTHS AND FOLK-TALES.

    The Three Kingdoms,--the Copper, the Silver, and the Golden.
    Ivan Tsarevich, the Fire Bird, and the Gray Wolf.
    Ivan the Peasant's Son and the Little Man Himself One Finger
        Tall, his Mustache Seven Versts in Length.
    The Feather of Bright Finist the Falcon.
    The Pig with Gold Bristles, the Deer with Golden Horns, and the
        Golden-Maned Steed with Golden Tail.
    Water of Youth, Water of Life, and Water of Death.
    The Footless and Blind Champions.
    The Three Kingdoms.
    Koshchéi Without-Death.
    Vassilissa Golden Tress, Bareheaded Beauty.
    The Ring with Twelve Screws.
    The Footless and the Blind.
    Koshchéi Without-Death.
    Go to the Verge of Destruction and bring back Shmat-Razum.
    Marya Morevna.
    Yelena the Wise.
    The Seven Simeons, Full Brothers.
    The Enchanted Princess.
    Vassilissa the Cunning and the Tsar of the Sea.

    CHEKH MYTHS AND FOLK-TALES.

    Boyislav, Youngest of Twelve.
    The Table, the Pack, and the Bag.
    The King of the Toads.
    The Mouse-Hole and the Underground Kingdom.
    The Cuirassier and the Horned Princess.
    The Treacherous Brethren.

    MAGYAR MYTHS AND FOLK-TALES.

    The Poor Man and the King of the Crows.
    The Useless Wagoner.
    Mirko the King's Son.
    The Reed Maiden.
    Kiss Miklos and the Green Daughter of the Green King.
    The Hedgehog, the Merchant, the King, and the Poor Man.

[Decoration]

OPINIONS.

A volume as fascinating as any fairy book that was ever published; and
simply for their wealth of imagination and rare simplicity of diction
these stories will be widely read.... The volume, taken for all in
all, is a distinct addition to literature, a priceless boon to
scientific investigation, and a credit to American scholarship. The
educated people of this country will do well to buy and read this
truly remarkable book.--_The Beacon._

Will be welcome to many readers, not only to students, but to children,
who find inexhaustible interest in just such folk-tales.--_Public
Opinion._

At once thoroughly admirable and thoroughly delightful, ... there is a
surprising freshness and individuality of flavor in them.--_Boston
Courier._

Stories of unique character, full of grotesque and marvellous
adventures, told with a beautiful simplicity of style which speaks
well for the faithfulness of the translator's work.--_Milwaukee
Sentinel._

Prof. Jeremiah Curtin gives us a large collection of these tales, many
of which are very interesting, many beautiful, and all strikingly
curious.--_Boston Advertiser._

Mr. Curtin spares no pains in his researches into the early literature
of the chief primitive races of the earth. Less than a year has passed
since the publication of his admirable work on "Irish Folk-Lore." The
present volume adds his discoveries among three other important
nations.--_The Dial._

Mythology has not yet come to a science. Its tales for the most part
continue to be curious bits of literature merely, highly imaginative
and entertaining, but only slightly, if at all, connected with truth
and reason so far as we can discover. Still there comes to us out of
the mythologic sky an occasional ray of meaning which seems to the
hopeful a promise that the history of credibility and of fact shall
ultimately be extended far backward, perhaps into the remotest ages of
mankind, through illumination from this source. Mr. Jeremiah Curtin
has written a most interesting essay bearing upon this idea in an
introduction to his new volume, "Myths and Folk-Tales of the Russians,
Western Slavs, and Magyars" (Boston: Little, Brown, & Co.). It is an
essay notable for its evidence of scholarly insight and investigation,
its curious and surprising information and suggestion, its perfect
lucidity, and its rare literary charm.--_New York Sun._

No one else could have so delightfully rendered in English the "Myths
and Folk-Tales of the Russians, Western Slavs, and Magyars." One of
the brightest men in Boston--poet, novelist, critic, and wit all in
one--told me that he had read this book through three times already,
and he suspected that it was his doom to read it a good many times
more. After all, is there anything quite so perennially fascinating as
folk-lore, unless it be the old ballads which turn folk-lore into
music?... Turn to the book itself and read about the "Fire Bird" and
the "Gray Wolf," and "The Ring with Twelve Screws" and "The King of
the Toads" and "The Reed Maiden," and you will forget as you read the
slow procession of mortal years, and dream yourself into Elfin Land,
where, I believe, they never grow old. And then if you want to come
back into active human life again, read that vigorous and thrilling
tale of love and war, "With Fire and Sword."--_Louise Chandler
Moulton, in the Boston Herald._

The literary charm of the translation is high, and the tone struck in
rendering the tales from the Slav and the Magyar languages is naïve
without being silly, natural without being monotonous.... The
collection opens with a varied miscellany of Russian stories about the
metal and animal kingdoms; enchanted princesses; pigs with golden
bristles; the waters of youth, life, and death; and the deathless
youth. The marvellous imagination of the Russ peoples plays sportively
through these creations, and exhibits wanton delight in hugeness, in
physical strength and beauty, in comic situations of its mighty
myth-tsars, and queer adventures for its king's sons and tsarins....
Grown-up children, as well as hunters after folk-lore and
superstitions, will revel in these freaks of fact and fancy, which Mr.
Curtin translates, and dedicates appropriately to Prof. F. J.
Child.--_The Critic._


[Decoration]

TALES OF THE FAIRIES AND OF THE GHOST-WORLD.

Collected from Oral Tradition in Southwest Munster.

BY JEREMIAH CURTIN.

_12mo. Cloth, $1.25._

It will attract earnest attention from cultivated readers everywhere
who delight in primitive romance expressed in the simple, unaffected
language of the common people.--_Boston Beacon._

            LITTLE, BROWN, & COMPANY, Publishers,
            254 Washington Street, Boston, Mass.




Transcriber's Note

The name meaning 'black fox' is referred to in different stories as
Yípokus and Yípokos, while a plant with red flowers is referred to as
both yosoü and yósoü. These are preserved as printed, as they may
indicate linguistic variations between story sources.

In the story 'Norwanchakus and Keriha', on page 212 Keriha mentions
going beyond the sky in the southwest, then goes beyond the sky in the
southeast. This inconsistency is preserved as printed.

In the story 'Olelbis', one character is named as both Tilichi and
Tilitchi. Although there are more instances of Tilitchi, reference to
a Wintu dictionary suggests that Tilichi is probably closer to the
correct spelling. However, it is preserved as printed in each case.

There were some other inconsistencies in the spelling of proper nouns.
For ease of searching, where there was a strong prevalence of one form
over another the transcriber has made them consistent, as follows:

    Page 234--Lasasswa amended to Lasaswa--"Old Lasaswa took one
    end of his rope, ..."

    Page 276--Tuletot amended to Tulitot--"While dancing, Tulitot
    took a snake from his mouth, ..."

    Page 285--Marima amended to Marimi--"... and you, my wife,
    Ochul Marimi, make ready; ..."

    Page 367--Marima amended to Marimi--"... Ahalamila, Metsi,
    and old Shushu Marimi."

    Page 377--Wipajusi amended to Hwipajusi--"... the youngest
    daughter of Hwipajusi, ..."

    Page 381--Wipajusi's amended to Hwipajusi's--"... and at dusk
    these two boys went to Hwipajusi's ..."

    Page 384--Wipajusi's amended to Hwipajusi's--"... the plunder
    brought from Hwipajusi's village; ..." and "Hwipajusi's three
    daughters were there, too, ..."

    Page 408--Hitchina amended to Hitchinna--"Hitchinna was lying
    in one corner ..."

    Page 428--Juiwaiya amended to Juiwaiyu--""I will sing now,"
    said Juiwaiyu, ..."

    Page 503--Pokalia amended to Pokaila--"... (Pom, earth;
    Pokaila, old woman) ..."

Minor punctuation errors have been repaired, and hyphenation has been
made consistent.

The following typographic errors have been repaired:

    Page vii--ix amended to xi--"Introduction  xi"

    Page viii--487 amended to 485--"Notes, and Names of
    Places  485"

    Page 111--went amended to want--"I want to send some one to
    see how many people there are ..."

    Page 343--wookpecker amended to woodpecker--"... and
    otter-skins and red-headed woodpecker scalps, ..."

    Page 523--HAIKA amended to HAKA--"HAKA KAINA"

Each story in the original book had a half-title page. The repeated
titles have been deleted.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Creation Myths of Primitive America, by 
Jeremiah Curtin

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CREATION MYTHS OF PRIMITIVE ***

***** This file should be named 39106-0.txt or 39106-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/1/0/39106/

Produced by Suzanne Shell, Sam W. and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


Project Gutenberg's The Legend of Sleepy Hollow, by Washington Irving

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Legend of Sleepy Hollow

Author: Washington Irving

Posting Date: June 25, 2008 [EBook #41]
Release Date: October, 1992

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LEGEND OF SLEEPY HOLLOW ***




Produced by Ilana M. (Kingsley) Newby and Greg Newby





THE LEGEND OF SLEEPY HOLLOW


by Washington Irving





FOUND AMONG THE PAPERS OF THE LATE DIEDRICH KNICKERBOCKER.


        A pleasing land of drowsy head it was,
          Of dreams that wave before the half-shut eye;
        And of gay castles in the clouds that pass,
          Forever flushing round a summer sky.
                                         CASTLE OF INDOLENCE.


In the bosom of one of those spacious coves which indent the eastern
shore of the Hudson, at that broad expansion of the river denominated
by the ancient Dutch navigators the Tappan Zee, and where they always
prudently shortened sail and implored the protection of St. Nicholas
when they crossed, there lies a small market town or rural port, which
by some is called Greensburgh, but which is more generally and properly
known by the name of Tarry Town. This name was given, we are told, in
former days, by the good housewives of the adjacent country, from the
inveterate propensity of their husbands to linger about the village
tavern on market days. Be that as it may, I do not vouch for the fact,
but merely advert to it, for the sake of being precise and authentic.
Not far from this village, perhaps about two miles, there is a little
valley or rather lap of land among high hills, which is one of the
quietest places in the whole world. A small brook glides through it,
with just murmur enough to lull one to repose; and the occasional
whistle of a quail or tapping of a woodpecker is almost the only sound
that ever breaks in upon the uniform tranquillity.

I recollect that, when a stripling, my first exploit in
squirrel-shooting was in a grove of tall walnut-trees that shades one
side of the valley. I had wandered into it at noontime, when all nature
is peculiarly quiet, and was startled by the roar of my own gun, as it
broke the Sabbath stillness around and was prolonged and reverberated
by the angry echoes. If ever I should wish for a retreat whither I might
steal from the world and its distractions, and dream quietly away the
remnant of a troubled life, I know of none more promising than this
little valley.

From the listless repose of the place, and the peculiar character of its
inhabitants, who are descendants from the original Dutch settlers, this
sequestered glen has long been known by the name of SLEEPY HOLLOW, and
its rustic lads are called the Sleepy Hollow Boys throughout all the
neighboring country. A drowsy, dreamy influence seems to hang over the
land, and to pervade the very atmosphere. Some say that the place
was bewitched by a High German doctor, during the early days of the
settlement; others, that an old Indian chief, the prophet or wizard of
his tribe, held his powwows there before the country was discovered by
Master Hendrick Hudson. Certain it is, the place still continues under
the sway of some witching power, that holds a spell over the minds of
the good people, causing them to walk in a continual reverie. They are
given to all kinds of marvellous beliefs, are subject to trances and
visions, and frequently see strange sights, and hear music and voices in
the air. The whole neighborhood abounds with local tales, haunted spots,
and twilight superstitions; stars shoot and meteors glare oftener across
the valley than in any other part of the country, and the nightmare,
with her whole ninefold, seems to make it the favorite scene of her
gambols.

The dominant spirit, however, that haunts this enchanted region, and
seems to be commander-in-chief of all the powers of the air, is the
apparition of a figure on horseback, without a head. It is said by some
to be the ghost of a Hessian trooper, whose head had been carried away
by a cannon-ball, in some nameless battle during the Revolutionary War,
and who is ever and anon seen by the country folk hurrying along in
the gloom of night, as if on the wings of the wind. His haunts are not
confined to the valley, but extend at times to the adjacent roads, and
especially to the vicinity of a church at no great distance. Indeed,
certain of the most authentic historians of those parts, who have been
careful in collecting and collating the floating facts concerning this
spectre, allege that the body of the trooper having been buried in the
churchyard, the ghost rides forth to the scene of battle in nightly
quest of his head, and that the rushing speed with which he sometimes
passes along the Hollow, like a midnight blast, is owing to his being
belated, and in a hurry to get back to the churchyard before daybreak.

Such is the general purport of this legendary superstition, which has
furnished materials for many a wild story in that region of shadows; and
the spectre is known at all the country firesides, by the name of the
Headless Horseman of Sleepy Hollow.

It is remarkable that the visionary propensity I have mentioned is not
confined to the native inhabitants of the valley, but is unconsciously
imbibed by every one who resides there for a time. However wide awake
they may have been before they entered that sleepy region, they are
sure, in a little time, to inhale the witching influence of the air, and
begin to grow imaginative, to dream dreams, and see apparitions.

I mention this peaceful spot with all possible laud, for it is in such
little retired Dutch valleys, found here and there embosomed in the
great State of New York, that population, manners, and customs remain
fixed, while the great torrent of migration and improvement, which is
making such incessant changes in other parts of this restless country,
sweeps by them unobserved. They are like those little nooks of still
water, which border a rapid stream, where we may see the straw and
bubble riding quietly at anchor, or slowly revolving in their mimic
harbor, undisturbed by the rush of the passing current. Though many
years have elapsed since I trod the drowsy shades of Sleepy Hollow, yet
I question whether I should not still find the same trees and the same
families vegetating in its sheltered bosom.

In this by-place of nature there abode, in a remote period of American
history, that is to say, some thirty years since, a worthy wight of the
name of Ichabod Crane, who sojourned, or, as he expressed it, "tarried,"
in Sleepy Hollow, for the purpose of instructing the children of the
vicinity. He was a native of Connecticut, a State which supplies the
Union with pioneers for the mind as well as for the forest, and sends
forth yearly its legions of frontier woodmen and country schoolmasters.
The cognomen of Crane was not inapplicable to his person. He was tall,
but exceedingly lank, with narrow shoulders, long arms and legs, hands
that dangled a mile out of his sleeves, feet that might have served for
shovels, and his whole frame most loosely hung together. His head was
small, and flat at top, with huge ears, large green glassy eyes, and a
long snipe nose, so that it looked like a weather-cock perched upon his
spindle neck to tell which way the wind blew. To see him striding along
the profile of a hill on a windy day, with his clothes bagging and
fluttering about him, one might have mistaken him for the genius of
famine descending upon the earth, or some scarecrow eloped from a
cornfield.

His schoolhouse was a low building of one large room, rudely constructed
of logs; the windows partly glazed, and partly patched with leaves of
old copybooks. It was most ingeniously secured at vacant hours, by a
withe twisted in the handle of the door, and stakes set against the
window shutters; so that though a thief might get in with perfect ease,
he would find some embarrassment in getting out,--an idea most probably
borrowed by the architect, Yost Van Houten, from the mystery of an
eelpot. The schoolhouse stood in a rather lonely but pleasant situation,
just at the foot of a woody hill, with a brook running close by, and
a formidable birch-tree growing at one end of it. From hence the low
murmur of his pupils' voices, conning over their lessons, might be heard
in a drowsy summer's day, like the hum of a beehive; interrupted now and
then by the authoritative voice of the master, in the tone of menace or
command, or, peradventure, by the appalling sound of the birch, as he
urged some tardy loiterer along the flowery path of knowledge. Truth to
say, he was a conscientious man, and ever bore in mind the golden maxim,
"Spare the rod and spoil the child." Ichabod Crane's scholars certainly
were not spoiled.

I would not have it imagined, however, that he was one of those cruel
potentates of the school who joy in the smart of their subjects; on
the contrary, he administered justice with discrimination rather than
severity; taking the burden off the backs of the weak, and laying it on
those of the strong. Your mere puny stripling, that winced at the least
flourish of the rod, was passed by with indulgence; but the claims of
justice were satisfied by inflicting a double portion on some little
tough wrong-headed, broad-skirted Dutch urchin, who sulked and swelled
and grew dogged and sullen beneath the birch. All this he called "doing
his duty by their parents;" and he never inflicted a chastisement
without following it by the assurance, so consolatory to the smarting
urchin, that "he would remember it and thank him for it the longest day
he had to live."

When school hours were over, he was even the companion and playmate
of the larger boys; and on holiday afternoons would convoy some of
the smaller ones home, who happened to have pretty sisters, or good
housewives for mothers, noted for the comforts of the cupboard. Indeed,
it behooved him to keep on good terms with his pupils. The revenue
arising from his school was small, and would have been scarcely
sufficient to furnish him with daily bread, for he was a huge feeder,
and, though lank, had the dilating powers of an anaconda; but to help
out his maintenance, he was, according to country custom in those
parts, boarded and lodged at the houses of the farmers whose children
he instructed. With these he lived successively a week at a time, thus
going the rounds of the neighborhood, with all his worldly effects tied
up in a cotton handkerchief.

That all this might not be too onerous on the purses of his rustic
patrons, who are apt to consider the costs of schooling a grievous
burden, and schoolmasters as mere drones, he had various ways of
rendering himself both useful and agreeable. He assisted the farmers
occasionally in the lighter labors of their farms, helped to make
hay, mended the fences, took the horses to water, drove the cows from
pasture, and cut wood for the winter fire. He laid aside, too, all the
dominant dignity and absolute sway with which he lorded it in his little
empire, the school, and became wonderfully gentle and ingratiating.
He found favor in the eyes of the mothers by petting the children,
particularly the youngest; and like the lion bold, which whilom so
magnanimously the lamb did hold, he would sit with a child on one knee,
and rock a cradle with his foot for whole hours together.

In addition to his other vocations, he was the singing-master of the
neighborhood, and picked up many bright shillings by instructing the
young folks in psalmody. It was a matter of no little vanity to him on
Sundays, to take his station in front of the church gallery, with a band
of chosen singers; where, in his own mind, he completely carried away
the palm from the parson. Certain it is, his voice resounded far above
all the rest of the congregation; and there are peculiar quavers still
to be heard in that church, and which may even be heard half a mile off,
quite to the opposite side of the millpond, on a still Sunday morning,
which are said to be legitimately descended from the nose of Ichabod
Crane. Thus, by divers little makeshifts, in that ingenious way which is
commonly denominated "by hook and by crook," the worthy pedagogue got on
tolerably enough, and was thought, by all who understood nothing of the
labor of headwork, to have a wonderfully easy life of it.

The schoolmaster is generally a man of some importance in the female
circle of a rural neighborhood; being considered a kind of idle,
gentlemanlike personage, of vastly superior taste and accomplishments to
the rough country swains, and, indeed, inferior in learning only to the
parson. His appearance, therefore, is apt to occasion some little stir
at the tea-table of a farmhouse, and the addition of a supernumerary
dish of cakes or sweetmeats, or, peradventure, the parade of a silver
teapot. Our man of letters, therefore, was peculiarly happy in the
smiles of all the country damsels. How he would figure among them in the
churchyard, between services on Sundays; gathering grapes for them from
the wild vines that overran the surrounding trees; reciting for their
amusement all the epitaphs on the tombstones; or sauntering, with a
whole bevy of them, along the banks of the adjacent millpond; while the
more bashful country bumpkins hung sheepishly back, envying his superior
elegance and address.

From his half-itinerant life, also, he was a kind of travelling gazette,
carrying the whole budget of local gossip from house to house, so that
his appearance was always greeted with satisfaction. He was, moreover,
esteemed by the women as a man of great erudition, for he had read
several books quite through, and was a perfect master of Cotton Mather's
"History of New England Witchcraft," in which, by the way, he most
firmly and potently believed.

He was, in fact, an odd mixture of small shrewdness and simple
credulity. His appetite for the marvellous, and his powers of digesting
it, were equally extraordinary; and both had been increased by his
residence in this spell-bound region. No tale was too gross or monstrous
for his capacious swallow. It was often his delight, after his school
was dismissed in the afternoon, to stretch himself on the rich bed of
clover bordering the little brook that whimpered by his schoolhouse, and
there con over old Mather's direful tales, until the gathering dusk of
evening made the printed page a mere mist before his eyes. Then, as he
wended his way by swamp and stream and awful woodland, to the farmhouse
where he happened to be quartered, every sound of nature, at that
witching hour, fluttered his excited imagination,--the moan of the
whip-poor-will from the hillside, the boding cry of the tree toad, that
harbinger of storm, the dreary hooting of the screech owl, or the
sudden rustling in the thicket of birds frightened from their roost. The
fireflies, too, which sparkled most vividly in the darkest places, now
and then startled him, as one of uncommon brightness would stream across
his path; and if, by chance, a huge blockhead of a beetle came winging
his blundering flight against him, the poor varlet was ready to give up
the ghost, with the idea that he was struck with a witch's token. His
only resource on such occasions, either to drown thought or drive away
evil spirits, was to sing psalm tunes and the good people of Sleepy
Hollow, as they sat by their doors of an evening, were often filled with
awe at hearing his nasal melody, "in linked sweetness long drawn out,"
floating from the distant hill, or along the dusky road.

Another of his sources of fearful pleasure was to pass long winter
evenings with the old Dutch wives, as they sat spinning by the fire,
with a row of apples roasting and spluttering along the hearth, and
listen to their marvellous tales of ghosts and goblins, and haunted
fields, and haunted brooks, and haunted bridges, and haunted houses,
and particularly of the headless horseman, or Galloping Hessian of the
Hollow, as they sometimes called him. He would delight them equally by
his anecdotes of witchcraft, and of the direful omens and portentous
sights and sounds in the air, which prevailed in the earlier times of
Connecticut; and would frighten them woefully with speculations upon
comets and shooting stars; and with the alarming fact that the world did
absolutely turn round, and that they were half the time topsy-turvy!

But if there was a pleasure in all this, while snugly cuddling in
the chimney corner of a chamber that was all of a ruddy glow from the
crackling wood fire, and where, of course, no spectre dared to show
its face, it was dearly purchased by the terrors of his subsequent walk
homewards. What fearful shapes and shadows beset his path, amidst the
dim and ghastly glare of a snowy night! With what wistful look did he
eye every trembling ray of light streaming across the waste fields from
some distant window! How often was he appalled by some shrub covered
with snow, which, like a sheeted spectre, beset his very path! How often
did he shrink with curdling awe at the sound of his own steps on the
frosty crust beneath his feet; and dread to look over his shoulder, lest
he should behold some uncouth being tramping close behind him! And how
often was he thrown into complete dismay by some rushing blast, howling
among the trees, in the idea that it was the Galloping Hessian on one of
his nightly scourings!

All these, however, were mere terrors of the night, phantoms of the mind
that walk in darkness; and though he had seen many spectres in his time,
and been more than once beset by Satan in divers shapes, in his lonely
perambulations, yet daylight put an end to all these evils; and he would
have passed a pleasant life of it, in despite of the Devil and all his
works, if his path had not been crossed by a being that causes more
perplexity to mortal man than ghosts, goblins, and the whole race of
witches put together, and that was--a woman.

Among the musical disciples who assembled, one evening in each week,
to receive his instructions in psalmody, was Katrina Van Tassel,
the daughter and only child of a substantial Dutch farmer. She was a
blooming lass of fresh eighteen; plump as a partridge; ripe and melting
and rosy-cheeked as one of her father's peaches, and universally famed,
not merely for her beauty, but her vast expectations. She was withal a
little of a coquette, as might be perceived even in her dress, which was
a mixture of ancient and modern fashions, as most suited to set off
her charms. She wore the ornaments of pure yellow gold, which her
great-great-grandmother had brought over from Saardam; the tempting
stomacher of the olden time, and withal a provokingly short petticoat,
to display the prettiest foot and ankle in the country round.

Ichabod Crane had a soft and foolish heart towards the sex; and it is
not to be wondered at that so tempting a morsel soon found favor in his
eyes, more especially after he had visited her in her paternal mansion.
Old Baltus Van Tassel was a perfect picture of a thriving, contented,
liberal-hearted farmer. He seldom, it is true, sent either his eyes or
his thoughts beyond the boundaries of his own farm; but within those
everything was snug, happy and well-conditioned. He was satisfied with
his wealth, but not proud of it; and piqued himself upon the hearty
abundance, rather than the style in which he lived. His stronghold was
situated on the banks of the Hudson, in one of those green, sheltered,
fertile nooks in which the Dutch farmers are so fond of nestling. A
great elm tree spread its broad branches over it, at the foot of which
bubbled up a spring of the softest and sweetest water, in a little well
formed of a barrel; and then stole sparkling away through the grass, to
a neighboring brook, that babbled along among alders and dwarf willows.
Hard by the farmhouse was a vast barn, that might have served for a
church; every window and crevice of which seemed bursting forth with the
treasures of the farm; the flail was busily resounding within it from
morning to night; swallows and martins skimmed twittering about the
eaves; and rows of pigeons, some with one eye turned up, as if watching
the weather, some with their heads under their wings or buried in their
bosoms, and others swelling, and cooing, and bowing about their dames,
were enjoying the sunshine on the roof. Sleek unwieldy porkers were
grunting in the repose and abundance of their pens, from whence sallied
forth, now and then, troops of sucking pigs, as if to snuff the air.
A stately squadron of snowy geese were riding in an adjoining pond,
convoying whole fleets of ducks; regiments of turkeys were gobbling
through the farmyard, and Guinea fowls fretting about it, like
ill-tempered housewives, with their peevish, discontented cry. Before
the barn door strutted the gallant cock, that pattern of a husband, a
warrior and a fine gentleman, clapping his burnished wings and crowing
in the pride and gladness of his heart,--sometimes tearing up the earth
with his feet, and then generously calling his ever-hungry family of
wives and children to enjoy the rich morsel which he had discovered.

The pedagogue's mouth watered as he looked upon this sumptuous promise
of luxurious winter fare. In his devouring mind's eye, he pictured to
himself every roasting-pig running about with a pudding in his belly,
and an apple in his mouth; the pigeons were snugly put to bed in a
comfortable pie, and tucked in with a coverlet of crust; the geese were
swimming in their own gravy; and the ducks pairing cosily in dishes,
like snug married couples, with a decent competency of onion sauce. In
the porkers he saw carved out the future sleek side of bacon, and juicy
relishing ham; not a turkey but he beheld daintily trussed up, with
its gizzard under its wing, and, peradventure, a necklace of savory
sausages; and even bright chanticleer himself lay sprawling on his back,
in a side dish, with uplifted claws, as if craving that quarter which
his chivalrous spirit disdained to ask while living.

As the enraptured Ichabod fancied all this, and as he rolled his great
green eyes over the fat meadow lands, the rich fields of wheat, of rye,
of buckwheat, and Indian corn, and the orchards burdened with ruddy
fruit, which surrounded the warm tenement of Van Tassel, his heart
yearned after the damsel who was to inherit these domains, and his
imagination expanded with the idea, how they might be readily turned
into cash, and the money invested in immense tracts of wild land, and
shingle palaces in the wilderness. Nay, his busy fancy already realized
his hopes, and presented to him the blooming Katrina, with a whole
family of children, mounted on the top of a wagon loaded with household
trumpery, with pots and kettles dangling beneath; and he beheld himself
bestriding a pacing mare, with a colt at her heels, setting out for
Kentucky, Tennessee,--or the Lord knows where!

When he entered the house, the conquest of his heart was complete. It
was one of those spacious farmhouses, with high-ridged but lowly sloping
roofs, built in the style handed down from the first Dutch settlers; the
low projecting eaves forming a piazza along the front, capable of being
closed up in bad weather. Under this were hung flails, harness, various
utensils of husbandry, and nets for fishing in the neighboring
river. Benches were built along the sides for summer use; and a great
spinning-wheel at one end, and a churn at the other, showed the various
uses to which this important porch might be devoted. From this piazza
the wondering Ichabod entered the hall, which formed the centre of the
mansion, and the place of usual residence. Here rows of resplendent
pewter, ranged on a long dresser, dazzled his eyes. In one corner
stood a huge bag of wool, ready to be spun; in another, a quantity of
linsey-woolsey just from the loom; ears of Indian corn, and strings of
dried apples and peaches, hung in gay festoons along the walls, mingled
with the gaud of red peppers; and a door left ajar gave him a peep into
the best parlor, where the claw-footed chairs and dark mahogany tables
shone like mirrors; andirons, with their accompanying shovel and
tongs, glistened from their covert of asparagus tops; mock-oranges and
conch-shells decorated the mantelpiece; strings of various-colored birds
eggs were suspended above it; a great ostrich egg was hung from
the centre of the room, and a corner cupboard, knowingly left open,
displayed immense treasures of old silver and well-mended china.

From the moment Ichabod laid his eyes upon these regions of delight, the
peace of his mind was at an end, and his only study was how to gain the
affections of the peerless daughter of Van Tassel. In this enterprise,
however, he had more real difficulties than generally fell to the lot of
a knight-errant of yore, who seldom had anything but giants, enchanters,
fiery dragons, and such like easily conquered adversaries, to contend
with and had to make his way merely through gates of iron and brass,
and walls of adamant to the castle keep, where the lady of his heart was
confined; all which he achieved as easily as a man would carve his way
to the centre of a Christmas pie; and then the lady gave him her hand as
a matter of course. Ichabod, on the contrary, had to win his way to
the heart of a country coquette, beset with a labyrinth of whims
and caprices, which were forever presenting new difficulties and
impediments; and he had to encounter a host of fearful adversaries of
real flesh and blood, the numerous rustic admirers, who beset every
portal to her heart, keeping a watchful and angry eye upon each other,
but ready to fly out in the common cause against any new competitor.

Among these, the most formidable was a burly, roaring, roystering blade,
of the name of Abraham, or, according to the Dutch abbreviation, Brom
Van Brunt, the hero of the country round, which rang with his feats of
strength and hardihood. He was broad-shouldered and double-jointed,
with short curly black hair, and a bluff but not unpleasant countenance,
having a mingled air of fun and arrogance. From his Herculean frame
and great powers of limb he had received the nickname of BROM BONES,
by which he was universally known. He was famed for great knowledge and
skill in horsemanship, being as dexterous on horseback as a Tartar.
He was foremost at all races and cock fights; and, with the ascendancy
which bodily strength always acquires in rustic life, was the umpire in
all disputes, setting his hat on one side, and giving his decisions with
an air and tone that admitted of no gainsay or appeal. He was always
ready for either a fight or a frolic; but had more mischief than
ill-will in his composition; and with all his overbearing roughness,
there was a strong dash of waggish good humor at bottom. He had three or
four boon companions, who regarded him as their model, and at the
head of whom he scoured the country, attending every scene of feud or
merriment for miles round. In cold weather he was distinguished by a
fur cap, surmounted with a flaunting fox's tail; and when the folks at a
country gathering descried this well-known crest at a distance, whisking
about among a squad of hard riders, they always stood by for a squall.
Sometimes his crew would be heard dashing along past the farmhouses at
midnight, with whoop and halloo, like a troop of Don Cossacks; and the
old dames, startled out of their sleep, would listen for a moment till
the hurry-scurry had clattered by, and then exclaim, "Ay, there goes
Brom Bones and his gang!" The neighbors looked upon him with a mixture
of awe, admiration, and good-will; and, when any madcap prank or rustic
brawl occurred in the vicinity, always shook their heads, and warranted
Brom Bones was at the bottom of it.

This rantipole hero had for some time singled out the blooming Katrina
for the object of his uncouth gallantries, and though his amorous
toyings were something like the gentle caresses and endearments of a
bear, yet it was whispered that she did not altogether discourage his
hopes. Certain it is, his advances were signals for rival candidates to
retire, who felt no inclination to cross a lion in his amours; insomuch,
that when his horse was seen tied to Van Tassel's paling, on a Sunday
night, a sure sign that his master was courting, or, as it is termed,
"sparking," within, all other suitors passed by in despair, and carried
the war into other quarters.

Such was the formidable rival with whom Ichabod Crane had to contend,
and, considering all things, a stouter man than he would have shrunk
from the competition, and a wiser man would have despaired. He had,
however, a happy mixture of pliability and perseverance in his nature;
he was in form and spirit like a supple-jack--yielding, but tough;
though he bent, he never broke; and though he bowed beneath the
slightest pressure, yet, the moment it was away--jerk!--he was as erect,
and carried his head as high as ever.

To have taken the field openly against his rival would have been
madness; for he was not a man to be thwarted in his amours, any more
than that stormy lover, Achilles. Ichabod, therefore, made his advances
in a quiet and gently insinuating manner. Under cover of his character
of singing-master, he made frequent visits at the farmhouse; not that he
had anything to apprehend from the meddlesome interference of parents,
which is so often a stumbling-block in the path of lovers. Balt Van
Tassel was an easy indulgent soul; he loved his daughter better even
than his pipe, and, like a reasonable man and an excellent father, let
her have her way in everything. His notable little wife, too, had enough
to do to attend to her housekeeping and manage her poultry; for, as she
sagely observed, ducks and geese are foolish things, and must be looked
after, but girls can take care of themselves. Thus, while the busy dame
bustled about the house, or plied her spinning-wheel at one end of the
piazza, honest Balt would sit smoking his evening pipe at the other,
watching the achievements of a little wooden warrior, who, armed with a
sword in each hand, was most valiantly fighting the wind on the pinnacle
of the barn. In the mean time, Ichabod would carry on his suit with the
daughter by the side of the spring under the great elm, or sauntering
along in the twilight, that hour so favorable to the lover's eloquence.

I profess not to know how women's hearts are wooed and won. To me they
have always been matters of riddle and admiration. Some seem to have but
one vulnerable point, or door of access; while others have a thousand
avenues, and may be captured in a thousand different ways. It is a
great triumph of skill to gain the former, but a still greater proof of
generalship to maintain possession of the latter, for man must battle
for his fortress at every door and window. He who wins a thousand common
hearts is therefore entitled to some renown; but he who keeps undisputed
sway over the heart of a coquette is indeed a hero. Certain it is, this
was not the case with the redoubtable Brom Bones; and from the moment
Ichabod Crane made his advances, the interests of the former evidently
declined: his horse was no longer seen tied to the palings on Sunday
nights, and a deadly feud gradually arose between him and the preceptor
of Sleepy Hollow.

Brom, who had a degree of rough chivalry in his nature, would fain have
carried matters to open warfare and have settled their pretensions
to the lady, according to the mode of those most concise and simple
reasoners, the knights-errant of yore,--by single combat; but Ichabod
was too conscious of the superior might of his adversary to enter the
lists against him; he had overheard a boast of Bones, that he would
"double the schoolmaster up, and lay him on a shelf of his own
schoolhouse;" and he was too wary to give him an opportunity. There was
something extremely provoking in this obstinately pacific system; it
left Brom no alternative but to draw upon the funds of rustic waggery in
his disposition, and to play off boorish practical jokes upon his rival.
Ichabod became the object of whimsical persecution to Bones and his gang
of rough riders. They harried his hitherto peaceful domains; smoked
out his singing school by stopping up the chimney; broke into the
schoolhouse at night, in spite of its formidable fastenings of withe
and window stakes, and turned everything topsy-turvy, so that the poor
schoolmaster began to think all the witches in the country held
their meetings there. But what was still more annoying, Brom took all
opportunities of turning him into ridicule in presence of his mistress,
and had a scoundrel dog whom he taught to whine in the most ludicrous
manner, and introduced as a rival of Ichabod's, to instruct her in
psalmody.

In this way matters went on for some time, without producing any
material effect on the relative situations of the contending powers. On
a fine autumnal afternoon, Ichabod, in pensive mood, sat enthroned on
the lofty stool from whence he usually watched all the concerns of his
little literary realm. In his hand he swayed a ferule, that sceptre of
despotic power; the birch of justice reposed on three nails behind the
throne, a constant terror to evil doers, while on the desk before
him might be seen sundry contraband articles and prohibited weapons,
detected upon the persons of idle urchins, such as half-munched apples,
popguns, whirligigs, fly-cages, and whole legions of rampant little
paper gamecocks. Apparently there had been some appalling act of justice
recently inflicted, for his scholars were all busily intent upon their
books, or slyly whispering behind them with one eye kept upon the
master; and a kind of buzzing stillness reigned throughout the
schoolroom. It was suddenly interrupted by the appearance of a negro in
tow-cloth jacket and trowsers, a round-crowned fragment of a hat,
like the cap of Mercury, and mounted on the back of a ragged, wild,
half-broken colt, which he managed with a rope by way of halter. He came
clattering up to the school door with an invitation to Ichabod to attend
a merry-making or "quilting frolic," to be held that evening at
Mynheer Van Tassel's; and having delivered his message with that air of
importance, and effort at fine language, which a negro is apt to display
on petty embassies of the kind, he dashed over the brook, and was seen
scampering away up the hollow, full of the importance and hurry of his
mission.

All was now bustle and hubbub in the late quiet schoolroom. The scholars
were hurried through their lessons without stopping at trifles; those
who were nimble skipped over half with impunity, and those who were
tardy had a smart application now and then in the rear, to quicken their
speed or help them over a tall word. Books were flung aside without
being put away on the shelves, inkstands were overturned, benches thrown
down, and the whole school was turned loose an hour before the usual
time, bursting forth like a legion of young imps, yelping and racketing
about the green in joy at their early emancipation.

The gallant Ichabod now spent at least an extra half hour at his toilet,
brushing and furbishing up his best, and indeed only suit of rusty
black, and arranging his locks by a bit of broken looking-glass that
hung up in the schoolhouse. That he might make his appearance before his
mistress in the true style of a cavalier, he borrowed a horse from the
farmer with whom he was domiciliated, a choleric old Dutchman of the
name of Hans Van Ripper, and, thus gallantly mounted, issued forth like
a knight-errant in quest of adventures. But it is meet I should, in
the true spirit of romantic story, give some account of the looks
and equipments of my hero and his steed. The animal he bestrode was
a broken-down plow-horse, that had outlived almost everything but its
viciousness. He was gaunt and shagged, with a ewe neck, and a head like
a hammer; his rusty mane and tail were tangled and knotted with burs;
one eye had lost its pupil, and was glaring and spectral, but the other
had the gleam of a genuine devil in it. Still he must have had fire and
mettle in his day, if we may judge from the name he bore of Gunpowder.
He had, in fact, been a favorite steed of his master's, the choleric Van
Ripper, who was a furious rider, and had infused, very probably, some of
his own spirit into the animal; for, old and broken-down as he looked,
there was more of the lurking devil in him than in any young filly in
the country.

Ichabod was a suitable figure for such a steed. He rode with short
stirrups, which brought his knees nearly up to the pommel of the saddle;
his sharp elbows stuck out like grasshoppers'; he carried his whip
perpendicularly in his hand, like a sceptre, and as his horse jogged on,
the motion of his arms was not unlike the flapping of a pair of wings. A
small wool hat rested on the top of his nose, for so his scanty strip of
forehead might be called, and the skirts of his black coat fluttered out
almost to the horses tail. Such was the appearance of Ichabod and his
steed as they shambled out of the gate of Hans Van Ripper, and it was
altogether such an apparition as is seldom to be met with in broad
daylight.

It was, as I have said, a fine autumnal day; the sky was clear and
serene, and nature wore that rich and golden livery which we always
associate with the idea of abundance. The forests had put on their sober
brown and yellow, while some trees of the tenderer kind had been nipped
by the frosts into brilliant dyes of orange, purple, and scarlet.
Streaming files of wild ducks began to make their appearance high in the
air; the bark of the squirrel might be heard from the groves of beech
and hickory-nuts, and the pensive whistle of the quail at intervals from
the neighboring stubble field.

The small birds were taking their farewell banquets. In the fullness
of their revelry, they fluttered, chirping and frolicking from bush to
bush, and tree to tree, capricious from the very profusion and variety
around them. There was the honest cock robin, the favorite game of
stripling sportsmen, with its loud querulous note; and the twittering
blackbirds flying in sable clouds; and the golden-winged woodpecker with
his crimson crest, his broad black gorget, and splendid plumage; and the
cedar bird, with its red-tipt wings and yellow-tipt tail and its little
monteiro cap of feathers; and the blue jay, that noisy coxcomb, in his
gay light blue coat and white underclothes, screaming and chattering,
nodding and bobbing and bowing, and pretending to be on good terms with
every songster of the grove.

As Ichabod jogged slowly on his way, his eye, ever open to every symptom
of culinary abundance, ranged with delight over the treasures of jolly
autumn. On all sides he beheld vast store of apples; some hanging in
oppressive opulence on the trees; some gathered into baskets and barrels
for the market; others heaped up in rich piles for the cider-press.
Farther on he beheld great fields of Indian corn, with its golden ears
peeping from their leafy coverts, and holding out the promise of cakes
and hasty-pudding; and the yellow pumpkins lying beneath them, turning
up their fair round bellies to the sun, and giving ample prospects of
the most luxurious of pies; and anon he passed the fragrant buckwheat
fields breathing the odor of the beehive, and as he beheld them, soft
anticipations stole over his mind of dainty slapjacks, well buttered,
and garnished with honey or treacle, by the delicate little dimpled hand
of Katrina Van Tassel.

Thus feeding his mind with many sweet thoughts and "sugared
suppositions," he journeyed along the sides of a range of hills which
look out upon some of the goodliest scenes of the mighty Hudson. The sun
gradually wheeled his broad disk down in the west. The wide bosom of the
Tappan Zee lay motionless and glassy, excepting that here and there a
gentle undulation waved and prolonged the blue shadow of the distant
mountain. A few amber clouds floated in the sky, without a breath of air
to move them. The horizon was of a fine golden tint, changing gradually
into a pure apple green, and from that into the deep blue of the
mid-heaven. A slanting ray lingered on the woody crests of the
precipices that overhung some parts of the river, giving greater depth
to the dark gray and purple of their rocky sides. A sloop was loitering
in the distance, dropping slowly down with the tide, her sail hanging
uselessly against the mast; and as the reflection of the sky gleamed
along the still water, it seemed as if the vessel was suspended in the
air.

It was toward evening that Ichabod arrived at the castle of the Heer
Van Tassel, which he found thronged with the pride and flower of the
adjacent country. Old farmers, a spare leathern-faced race, in homespun
coats and breeches, blue stockings, huge shoes, and magnificent pewter
buckles. Their brisk, withered little dames, in close-crimped caps,
long-waisted short gowns, homespun petticoats, with scissors and
pincushions, and gay calico pockets hanging on the outside. Buxom
lasses, almost as antiquated as their mothers, excepting where a straw
hat, a fine ribbon, or perhaps a white frock, gave symptoms of city
innovation. The sons, in short square-skirted coats, with rows of
stupendous brass buttons, and their hair generally queued in the fashion
of the times, especially if they could procure an eel-skin for the
purpose, it being esteemed throughout the country as a potent nourisher
and strengthener of the hair.

Brom Bones, however, was the hero of the scene, having come to the
gathering on his favorite steed Daredevil, a creature, like himself,
full of mettle and mischief, and which no one but himself could manage.
He was, in fact, noted for preferring vicious animals, given to all
kinds of tricks which kept the rider in constant risk of his neck, for
he held a tractable, well-broken horse as unworthy of a lad of spirit.

Fain would I pause to dwell upon the world of charms that burst upon
the enraptured gaze of my hero, as he entered the state parlor of Van
Tassel's mansion. Not those of the bevy of buxom lasses, with their
luxurious display of red and white; but the ample charms of a genuine
Dutch country tea-table, in the sumptuous time of autumn. Such heaped up
platters of cakes of various and almost indescribable kinds, known only
to experienced Dutch housewives! There was the doughty doughnut, the
tender oly koek, and the crisp and crumbling cruller; sweet cakes and
short cakes, ginger cakes and honey cakes, and the whole family of
cakes. And then there were apple pies, and peach pies, and pumpkin pies;
besides slices of ham and smoked beef; and moreover delectable dishes
of preserved plums, and peaches, and pears, and quinces; not to mention
broiled shad and roasted chickens; together with bowls of milk and
cream, all mingled higgledy-piggledy, pretty much as I have enumerated
them, with the motherly teapot sending up its clouds of vapor from the
midst--Heaven bless the mark! I want breath and time to discuss this
banquet as it deserves, and am too eager to get on with my story.
Happily, Ichabod Crane was not in so great a hurry as his historian, but
did ample justice to every dainty.

He was a kind and thankful creature, whose heart dilated in proportion
as his skin was filled with good cheer, and whose spirits rose with
eating, as some men's do with drink. He could not help, too, rolling his
large eyes round him as he ate, and chuckling with the possibility that
he might one day be lord of all this scene of almost unimaginable luxury
and splendor. Then, he thought, how soon he'd turn his back upon the old
schoolhouse; snap his fingers in the face of Hans Van Ripper, and every
other niggardly patron, and kick any itinerant pedagogue out of doors
that should dare to call him comrade!

Old Baltus Van Tassel moved about among his guests with a face dilated
with content and good humor, round and jolly as the harvest moon. His
hospitable attentions were brief, but expressive, being confined to a
shake of the hand, a slap on the shoulder, a loud laugh, and a pressing
invitation to "fall to, and help themselves."

And now the sound of the music from the common room, or hall, summoned
to the dance. The musician was an old gray-headed negro, who had
been the itinerant orchestra of the neighborhood for more than half a
century. His instrument was as old and battered as himself. The greater
part of the time he scraped on two or three strings, accompanying every
movement of the bow with a motion of the head; bowing almost to the
ground, and stamping with his foot whenever a fresh couple were to
start.

Ichabod prided himself upon his dancing as much as upon his vocal
powers. Not a limb, not a fibre about him was idle; and to have seen his
loosely hung frame in full motion, and clattering about the room, you
would have thought St. Vitus himself, that blessed patron of the dance,
was figuring before you in person. He was the admiration of all the
negroes; who, having gathered, of all ages and sizes, from the farm
and the neighborhood, stood forming a pyramid of shining black faces at
every door and window, gazing with delight at the scene, rolling their
white eyeballs, and showing grinning rows of ivory from ear to ear. How
could the flogger of urchins be otherwise than animated and joyous? The
lady of his heart was his partner in the dance, and smiling graciously
in reply to all his amorous oglings; while Brom Bones, sorely smitten
with love and jealousy, sat brooding by himself in one corner.

When the dance was at an end, Ichabod was attracted to a knot of the
sager folks, who, with Old Van Tassel, sat smoking at one end of the
piazza, gossiping over former times, and drawing out long stories about
the war.

This neighborhood, at the time of which I am speaking, was one of those
highly favored places which abound with chronicle and great men. The
British and American line had run near it during the war; it had,
therefore, been the scene of marauding and infested with refugees,
cowboys, and all kinds of border chivalry. Just sufficient time had
elapsed to enable each storyteller to dress up his tale with a little
becoming fiction, and, in the indistinctness of his recollection, to
make himself the hero of every exploit.

There was the story of Doffue Martling, a large blue-bearded Dutchman,
who had nearly taken a British frigate with an old iron nine-pounder
from a mud breastwork, only that his gun burst at the sixth discharge.
And there was an old gentleman who shall be nameless, being too rich
a mynheer to be lightly mentioned, who, in the battle of White Plains,
being an excellent master of defence, parried a musket-ball with a small
sword, insomuch that he absolutely felt it whiz round the blade, and
glance off at the hilt; in proof of which he was ready at any time to
show the sword, with the hilt a little bent. There were several more
that had been equally great in the field, not one of whom but was
persuaded that he had a considerable hand in bringing the war to a happy
termination.

But all these were nothing to the tales of ghosts and apparitions that
succeeded. The neighborhood is rich in legendary treasures of the
kind. Local tales and superstitions thrive best in these sheltered,
long-settled retreats; but are trampled under foot by the shifting
throng that forms the population of most of our country places. Besides,
there is no encouragement for ghosts in most of our villages, for they
have scarcely had time to finish their first nap and turn themselves in
their graves, before their surviving friends have travelled away from
the neighborhood; so that when they turn out at night to walk their
rounds, they have no acquaintance left to call upon. This is perhaps the
reason why we so seldom hear of ghosts except in our long-established
Dutch communities.

The immediate cause, however, of the prevalence of supernatural stories
in these parts, was doubtless owing to the vicinity of Sleepy Hollow.
There was a contagion in the very air that blew from that haunted
region; it breathed forth an atmosphere of dreams and fancies infecting
all the land. Several of the Sleepy Hollow people were present at
Van Tassel's, and, as usual, were doling out their wild and wonderful
legends. Many dismal tales were told about funeral trains, and mourning
cries and wailings heard and seen about the great tree where the
unfortunate Major André was taken, and which stood in the neighborhood.
Some mention was made also of the woman in white, that haunted the
dark glen at Raven Rock, and was often heard to shriek on winter nights
before a storm, having perished there in the snow. The chief part of the
stories, however, turned upon the favorite spectre of Sleepy Hollow, the
Headless Horseman, who had been heard several times of late, patrolling
the country; and, it was said, tethered his horse nightly among the
graves in the churchyard.

The sequestered situation of this church seems always to have made it a
favorite haunt of troubled spirits. It stands on a knoll, surrounded by
locust-trees and lofty elms, from among which its decent, whitewashed
walls shine modestly forth, like Christian purity beaming through the
shades of retirement. A gentle slope descends from it to a silver sheet
of water, bordered by high trees, between which, peeps may be caught at
the blue hills of the Hudson. To look upon its grass-grown yard, where
the sunbeams seem to sleep so quietly, one would think that there at
least the dead might rest in peace. On one side of the church extends a
wide woody dell, along which raves a large brook among broken rocks and
trunks of fallen trees. Over a deep black part of the stream, not far
from the church, was formerly thrown a wooden bridge; the road that led
to it, and the bridge itself, were thickly shaded by overhanging trees,
which cast a gloom about it, even in the daytime; but occasioned a
fearful darkness at night. Such was one of the favorite haunts of
the Headless Horseman, and the place where he was most frequently
encountered. The tale was told of old Brouwer, a most heretical
disbeliever in ghosts, how he met the Horseman returning from his foray
into Sleepy Hollow, and was obliged to get up behind him; how they
galloped over bush and brake, over hill and swamp, until they reached
the bridge; when the Horseman suddenly turned into a skeleton, threw old
Brouwer into the brook, and sprang away over the tree-tops with a clap
of thunder.

This story was immediately matched by a thrice marvellous adventure of
Brom Bones, who made light of the Galloping Hessian as an arrant jockey.
He affirmed that on returning one night from the neighboring village of
Sing Sing, he had been overtaken by this midnight trooper; that he had
offered to race with him for a bowl of punch, and should have won it
too, for Daredevil beat the goblin horse all hollow, but just as they
came to the church bridge, the Hessian bolted, and vanished in a flash
of fire.

All these tales, told in that drowsy undertone with which men talk in
the dark, the countenances of the listeners only now and then receiving
a casual gleam from the glare of a pipe, sank deep in the mind of
Ichabod. He repaid them in kind with large extracts from his invaluable
author, Cotton Mather, and added many marvellous events that had taken
place in his native State of Connecticut, and fearful sights which he
had seen in his nightly walks about Sleepy Hollow.

The revel now gradually broke up. The old farmers gathered together
their families in their wagons, and were heard for some time rattling
along the hollow roads, and over the distant hills. Some of the
damsels mounted on pillions behind their favorite swains, and their
light-hearted laughter, mingling with the clatter of hoofs, echoed along
the silent woodlands, sounding fainter and fainter, until they gradually
died away,--and the late scene of noise and frolic was all silent and
deserted. Ichabod only lingered behind, according to the custom of
country lovers, to have a tête-à-tête with the heiress; fully convinced
that he was now on the high road to success. What passed at this
interview I will not pretend to say, for in fact I do not know.
Something, however, I fear me, must have gone wrong, for he certainly
sallied forth, after no very great interval, with an air quite desolate
and chapfallen. Oh, these women! these women! Could that girl have been
playing off any of her coquettish tricks? Was her encouragement of the
poor pedagogue all a mere sham to secure her conquest of his rival?
Heaven only knows, not I! Let it suffice to say, Ichabod stole forth
with the air of one who had been sacking a henroost, rather than a fair
lady's heart. Without looking to the right or left to notice the scene
of rural wealth, on which he had so often gloated, he went straight to
the stable, and with several hearty cuffs and kicks roused his steed
most uncourteously from the comfortable quarters in which he was soundly
sleeping, dreaming of mountains of corn and oats, and whole valleys of
timothy and clover.

It was the very witching time of night that Ichabod, heavy-hearted and
crestfallen, pursued his travels homewards, along the sides of the
lofty hills which rise above Tarry Town, and which he had traversed so
cheerily in the afternoon. The hour was as dismal as himself. Far below
him the Tappan Zee spread its dusky and indistinct waste of waters, with
here and there the tall mast of a sloop, riding quietly at anchor under
the land. In the dead hush of midnight, he could even hear the barking
of the watchdog from the opposite shore of the Hudson; but it was
so vague and faint as only to give an idea of his distance from this
faithful companion of man. Now and then, too, the long-drawn crowing
of a cock, accidentally awakened, would sound far, far off, from some
farmhouse away among the hills--but it was like a dreaming sound in his
ear. No signs of life occurred near him, but occasionally the melancholy
chirp of a cricket, or perhaps the guttural twang of a bullfrog from a
neighboring marsh, as if sleeping uncomfortably and turning suddenly in
his bed.

All the stories of ghosts and goblins that he had heard in the afternoon
now came crowding upon his recollection. The night grew darker and
darker; the stars seemed to sink deeper in the sky, and driving clouds
occasionally hid them from his sight. He had never felt so lonely and
dismal. He was, moreover, approaching the very place where many of the
scenes of the ghost stories had been laid. In the centre of the road
stood an enormous tulip-tree, which towered like a giant above all the
other trees of the neighborhood, and formed a kind of landmark. Its
limbs were gnarled and fantastic, large enough to form trunks for
ordinary trees, twisting down almost to the earth, and rising again into
the air. It was connected with the tragical story of the unfortunate
André, who had been taken prisoner hard by; and was universally known
by the name of Major André's tree. The common people regarded it with a
mixture of respect and superstition, partly out of sympathy for the
fate of its ill-starred namesake, and partly from the tales of strange
sights, and doleful lamentations, told concerning it.

As Ichabod approached this fearful tree, he began to whistle; he thought
his whistle was answered; it was but a blast sweeping sharply through
the dry branches. As he approached a little nearer, he thought he saw
something white, hanging in the midst of the tree: he paused and ceased
whistling but, on looking more narrowly, perceived that it was a place
where the tree had been scathed by lightning, and the white wood laid
bare. Suddenly he heard a groan--his teeth chattered, and his knees
smote against the saddle: it was but the rubbing of one huge bough upon
another, as they were swayed about by the breeze. He passed the tree in
safety, but new perils lay before him.

About two hundred yards from the tree, a small brook crossed the road,
and ran into a marshy and thickly-wooded glen, known by the name of
Wiley's Swamp. A few rough logs, laid side by side, served for a bridge
over this stream. On that side of the road where the brook entered the
wood, a group of oaks and chestnuts, matted thick with wild grape-vines,
threw a cavernous gloom over it. To pass this bridge was the severest
trial. It was at this identical spot that the unfortunate André was
captured, and under the covert of those chestnuts and vines were the
sturdy yeomen concealed who surprised him. This has ever since been
considered a haunted stream, and fearful are the feelings of the
schoolboy who has to pass it alone after dark.

As he approached the stream, his heart began to thump; he summoned up,
however, all his resolution, gave his horse half a score of kicks in the
ribs, and attempted to dash briskly across the bridge; but instead of
starting forward, the perverse old animal made a lateral movement, and
ran broadside against the fence. Ichabod, whose fears increased with the
delay, jerked the reins on the other side, and kicked lustily with the
contrary foot: it was all in vain; his steed started, it is true, but
it was only to plunge to the opposite side of the road into a thicket of
brambles and alder bushes. The schoolmaster now bestowed both whip and
heel upon the starveling ribs of old Gunpowder, who dashed forward,
snuffling and snorting, but came to a stand just by the bridge, with a
suddenness that had nearly sent his rider sprawling over his head.
Just at this moment a plashy tramp by the side of the bridge caught the
sensitive ear of Ichabod. In the dark shadow of the grove, on the margin
of the brook, he beheld something huge, misshapen and towering. It
stirred not, but seemed gathered up in the gloom, like some gigantic
monster ready to spring upon the traveller.

The hair of the affrighted pedagogue rose upon his head with terror.
What was to be done? To turn and fly was now too late; and besides,
what chance was there of escaping ghost or goblin, if such it was, which
could ride upon the wings of the wind? Summoning up, therefore, a
show of courage, he demanded in stammering accents, "Who are you?"
He received no reply. He repeated his demand in a still more agitated
voice. Still there was no answer. Once more he cudgelled the sides
of the inflexible Gunpowder, and, shutting his eyes, broke forth with
involuntary fervor into a psalm tune. Just then the shadowy object of
alarm put itself in motion, and with a scramble and a bound stood at
once in the middle of the road. Though the night was dark and dismal,
yet the form of the unknown might now in some degree be ascertained. He
appeared to be a horseman of large dimensions, and mounted on a black
horse of powerful frame. He made no offer of molestation or sociability,
but kept aloof on one side of the road, jogging along on the blind side
of old Gunpowder, who had now got over his fright and waywardness.

Ichabod, who had no relish for this strange midnight companion, and
bethought himself of the adventure of Brom Bones with the Galloping
Hessian, now quickened his steed in hopes of leaving him behind. The
stranger, however, quickened his horse to an equal pace. Ichabod pulled
up, and fell into a walk, thinking to lag behind,--the other did the
same. His heart began to sink within him; he endeavored to resume his
psalm tune, but his parched tongue clove to the roof of his mouth, and
he could not utter a stave. There was something in the moody and
dogged silence of this pertinacious companion that was mysterious and
appalling. It was soon fearfully accounted for. On mounting a rising
ground, which brought the figure of his fellow-traveller in relief
against the sky, gigantic in height, and muffled in a cloak, Ichabod was
horror-struck on perceiving that he was headless!--but his horror was
still more increased on observing that the head, which should have
rested on his shoulders, was carried before him on the pommel of his
saddle! His terror rose to desperation; he rained a shower of kicks and
blows upon Gunpowder, hoping by a sudden movement to give his companion
the slip; but the spectre started full jump with him. Away, then, they
dashed through thick and thin; stones flying and sparks flashing at
every bound. Ichabod's flimsy garments fluttered in the air, as
he stretched his long lank body away over his horse's head, in the
eagerness of his flight.

They had now reached the road which turns off to Sleepy Hollow; but
Gunpowder, who seemed possessed with a demon, instead of keeping up it,
made an opposite turn, and plunged headlong downhill to the left. This
road leads through a sandy hollow shaded by trees for about a quarter
of a mile, where it crosses the bridge famous in goblin story; and just
beyond swells the green knoll on which stands the whitewashed church.

As yet the panic of the steed had given his unskilful rider an apparent
advantage in the chase, but just as he had got half way through the
hollow, the girths of the saddle gave way, and he felt it slipping from
under him. He seized it by the pommel, and endeavored to hold it firm,
but in vain; and had just time to save himself by clasping old Gunpowder
round the neck, when the saddle fell to the earth, and he heard it
trampled under foot by his pursuer. For a moment the terror of Hans Van
Ripper's wrath passed across his mind,--for it was his Sunday saddle;
but this was no time for petty fears; the goblin was hard on his
haunches; and (unskilful rider that he was!) he had much ado to maintain
his seat; sometimes slipping on one side, sometimes on another, and
sometimes jolted on the high ridge of his horse's backbone, with a
violence that he verily feared would cleave him asunder.

An opening in the trees now cheered him with the hopes that the church
bridge was at hand. The wavering reflection of a silver star in the
bosom of the brook told him that he was not mistaken. He saw the walls
of the church dimly glaring under the trees beyond. He recollected the
place where Brom Bones's ghostly competitor had disappeared. "If I can
but reach that bridge," thought Ichabod, "I am safe." Just then he heard
the black steed panting and blowing close behind him; he even fancied
that he felt his hot breath. Another convulsive kick in the ribs, and
old Gunpowder sprang upon the bridge; he thundered over the resounding
planks; he gained the opposite side; and now Ichabod cast a look behind
to see if his pursuer should vanish, according to rule, in a flash of
fire and brimstone. Just then he saw the goblin rising in his stirrups,
and in the very act of hurling his head at him. Ichabod endeavored to
dodge the horrible missile, but too late. It encountered his cranium
with a tremendous crash,--he was tumbled headlong into the dust, and
Gunpowder, the black steed, and the goblin rider, passed by like a
whirlwind.

The next morning the old horse was found without his saddle, and with
the bridle under his feet, soberly cropping the grass at his master's
gate. Ichabod did not make his appearance at breakfast; dinner-hour
came, but no Ichabod. The boys assembled at the schoolhouse, and
strolled idly about the banks of the brook; but no schoolmaster. Hans
Van Ripper now began to feel some uneasiness about the fate of poor
Ichabod, and his saddle. An inquiry was set on foot, and after diligent
investigation they came upon his traces. In one part of the road leading
to the church was found the saddle trampled in the dirt; the tracks of
horses' hoofs deeply dented in the road, and evidently at furious speed,
were traced to the bridge, beyond which, on the bank of a broad part of
the brook, where the water ran deep and black, was found the hat of the
unfortunate Ichabod, and close beside it a shattered pumpkin.

The brook was searched, but the body of the schoolmaster was not to
be discovered. Hans Van Ripper as executor of his estate, examined the
bundle which contained all his worldly effects. They consisted of two
shirts and a half; two stocks for the neck; a pair or two of worsted
stockings; an old pair of corduroy small-clothes; a rusty razor; a book
of psalm tunes full of dog's-ears; and a broken pitch-pipe. As to the
books and furniture of the schoolhouse, they belonged to the community,
excepting Cotton Mather's "History of Witchcraft," a "New England
Almanac," and a book of dreams and fortune-telling; in which last was
a sheet of foolscap much scribbled and blotted in several fruitless
attempts to make a copy of verses in honor of the heiress of Van Tassel.
These magic books and the poetic scrawl were forthwith consigned to the
flames by Hans Van Ripper; who, from that time forward, determined to
send his children no more to school, observing that he never knew
any good come of this same reading and writing. Whatever money the
schoolmaster possessed, and he had received his quarter's pay but a
day or two before, he must have had about his person at the time of his
disappearance.

The mysterious event caused much speculation at the church on the
following Sunday. Knots of gazers and gossips were collected in the
churchyard, at the bridge, and at the spot where the hat and pumpkin
had been found. The stories of Brouwer, of Bones, and a whole budget of
others were called to mind; and when they had diligently considered them
all, and compared them with the symptoms of the present case, they shook
their heads, and came to the conclusion that Ichabod had been carried
off by the Galloping Hessian. As he was a bachelor, and in nobody's
debt, nobody troubled his head any more about him; the school was
removed to a different quarter of the hollow, and another pedagogue
reigned in his stead.

It is true, an old farmer, who had been down to New York on a visit
several years after, and from whom this account of the ghostly adventure
was received, brought home the intelligence that Ichabod Crane was still
alive; that he had left the neighborhood partly through fear of the
goblin and Hans Van Ripper, and partly in mortification at having been
suddenly dismissed by the heiress; that he had changed his quarters to a
distant part of the country; had kept school and studied law at the same
time; had been admitted to the bar; turned politician; electioneered;
written for the newspapers; and finally had been made a justice of
the Ten Pound Court. Brom Bones, too, who, shortly after his rival's
disappearance conducted the blooming Katrina in triumph to the altar,
was observed to look exceedingly knowing whenever the story of Ichabod
was related, and always burst into a hearty laugh at the mention of the
pumpkin; which led some to suspect that he knew more about the matter
than he chose to tell.

The old country wives, however, who are the best judges of these
matters, maintain to this day that Ichabod was spirited away by
supernatural means; and it is a favorite story often told about the
neighborhood round the winter evening fire. The bridge became more than
ever an object of superstitious awe; and that may be the reason why the
road has been altered of late years, so as to approach the church by
the border of the millpond. The schoolhouse being deserted soon fell to
decay, and was reported to be haunted by the ghost of the unfortunate
pedagogue and the plowboy, loitering homeward of a still summer evening,
has often fancied his voice at a distance, chanting a melancholy psalm
tune among the tranquil solitudes of Sleepy Hollow.



POSTSCRIPT.

FOUND IN THE HANDWRITING OF MR. KNICKERBOCKER.

The preceding tale is given almost in the precise words in which I
heard it related at a Corporation meeting at the ancient city of
Manhattoes, at which were present many of its sagest and most
illustrious burghers. The narrator was a pleasant, shabby, gentlemanly
old fellow, in pepper-and-salt clothes, with a sadly humourous face,
and one whom I strongly suspected of being poor--he made such efforts
to be entertaining. When his story was concluded, there was much
laughter and approbation, particularly from two or three deputy
aldermen, who had been asleep the greater part of the time. There was,
however, one tall, dry-looking old gentleman, with beetling eyebrows,
who maintained a grave and rather severe face throughout, now and then
folding his arms, inclining his head, and looking down upon the floor,
as if turning a doubt over in his mind. He was one of your wary men,
who never laugh but upon good grounds--when they have reason and law on
their side. When the mirth of the rest of the company had subsided, and
silence was restored, he leaned one arm on the elbow of his chair, and
sticking the other akimbo, demanded, with a slight, but exceedingly
sage motion of the head, and contraction of the brow, what was the
moral of the story, and what it went to prove?

The story-teller, who was just putting a glass of wine to his lips, as
a refreshment after his toils, paused for a moment, looked at his
inquirer with an air of infinite deference, and, lowering the glass
slowly to the table, observed that the story was intended most
logically to prove--

"That there is no situation in life but has its advantages and
pleasures--provided we will but take a joke as we find it:

"That, therefore, he that runs races with goblin troopers is likely to
have rough riding of it.

"Ergo, for a country schoolmaster to be refused the hand of a Dutch
heiress is a certain step to high preferment in the state."

The cautious old gentleman knit his brows tenfold closer after this
explanation, being sorely puzzled by the ratiocination of the
syllogism, while, methought, the one in pepper-and-salt eyed him with
something of a triumphant leer. At length he observed that all this was
very well, but still he thought the story a little on the
extravagant--there were one or two points on which he had his doubts.

"Faith, sir," replied the story-teller, "as to that matter, I don't
believe one-half of it myself."  D. K.

THE END.




End of Project Gutenberg's The Legend of Sleepy Hollow, by Washington Irving

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LEGEND OF SLEEPY HOLLOW ***

***** This file should be named 41-8.txt or 41-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/41/

Produced by Ilana M. (Kingsley) Newby and Greg Newby

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg EBook of Tender Buttons, by Gertrude Stein

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Tender Buttons
       Objects--Food--Rooms

Author: Gertrude Stein

Release Date: March 17, 2005 [EBook #15396]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TENDER BUTTONS ***




Produced by Suzanne Shell, Josephine Paolucci and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.










TENDER BUTTONS

  Objects · Food · Rooms

Gertrude Stein

1914




CONTENTS


  OBJECTS

  FOOD

  ROOMS




OBJECTS


A CARAFE, THAT IS A BLIND GLASS.

A kind in glass and a cousin, a spectacle and nothing strange a single
hurt color and an arrangement in a system to pointing. All this and not
ordinary, not unordered in not resembling. The difference is spreading.


GLAZED GLITTER.

Nickel, what is nickel, it is originally rid of a cover.

The change in that is that red weakens an hour. The change has come.
There is no search. But there is, there is that hope and that
interpretation and sometime, surely any is unwelcome, sometime there is
breath and there will be a sinecure and charming very charming is that
clean and cleansing. Certainly glittering is handsome and convincing.

There is no gratitude in mercy and in medicine. There can be breakages
in Japanese. That is no programme. That is no color chosen. It was
chosen yesterday, that showed spitting and perhaps washing and
polishing. It certainly showed no obligation and perhaps if borrowing is
not natural there is some use in giving.


A SUBSTANCE IN A CUSHION.

The change of color is likely and a difference a very little difference
is prepared. Sugar is not a vegetable.

Callous is something that hardening leaves behind what will be soft if
there is a genuine interest in there being present as many girls as men.
Does this change. It shows that dirt is clean when there is a volume.

A cushion has that cover. Supposing you do not like to change, supposing
it is very clean that there is no change in appearance, supposing that
there is regularity and a costume is that any the worse than an oyster
and an exchange. Come to season that is there any extreme use in feather
and cotton. Is there not much more joy in a table and more chairs and
very likely roundness and a place to put them.

A circle of fine card board and a chance to see a tassel.

What is the use of a violent kind of delightfulness if there is no
pleasure in not getting tired of it. The question does not come before
there is a quotation. In any kind of place there is a top to covering
and it is a pleasure at any rate there is some venturing in refusing to
believe nonsense. It shows what use there is in a whole piece if one
uses it and it is extreme and very likely the little things could be
dearer but in any case there is a bargain and if there is the best thing
to do is to take it away and wear it and then be reckless be reckless
and resolved on returning gratitude.

Light blue and the same red with purple makes a change. It shows that
there is no mistake. Any pink shows that and very likely it is
reasonable. Very likely there should not be a finer fancy present. Some
increase means a calamity and this is the best preparation for three and
more being together. A little calm is so ordinary and in any case there
is sweetness and some of that.

A seal and matches and a swan and ivy and a suit.

A closet, a closet does not connect under the bed. The band if it is
white and black, the band has a green string. A sight a whole sight and
a little groan grinding makes a trimming such a sweet singing trimming
and a red thing not a round thing but a white thing, a red thing and a
white thing.

The disgrace is not in carelessness nor even in sewing it comes out out
of the way.

What is the sash like. The sash is not like anything mustard it is not
like a same thing that has stripes, it is not even more hurt than that,
it has a little top.


A BOX.

Out of kindness comes redness and out of rudeness comes rapid same
question, out of an eye comes research, out of selection comes painful
cattle. So then the order is that a white way of being round is
something suggesting a pin and is it disappointing, it is not, it is so
rudimentary to be analysed and see a fine substance strangely, it is so
earnest to have a green point not to red but to point again.


A PIECE OF COFFEE.

More of double.

A place in no new table.

A single image is not splendor. Dirty is yellow. A sign of more in not
mentioned. A piece of coffee is not a detainer. The resemblance to
yellow is dirtier and distincter. The clean mixture is whiter and not
coal color, never more coal color than altogether.

The sight of a reason, the same sight slighter, the sight of a simpler
negative answer, the same sore sounder, the intention to wishing, the
same splendor, the same furniture.

The time to show a message is when too late and later there is no
hanging in a blight.

A not torn rose-wood color. If it is not dangerous then a pleasure and
more than any other if it is cheap is not cheaper. The amusing side is
that the sooner there are no fewer the more certain is the necessity
dwindled. Supposing that the case contained rose-wood and a color.
Supposing that there was no reason for a distress and more likely for a
number, supposing that there was no astonishment, is it not necessary to
mingle astonishment.

The settling of stationing cleaning is one way not to shatter scatter
and scattering. The one way to use custom is to use soap and silk for
cleaning. The one way to see cotton is to have a design concentrating
the illusion and the illustration. The perfect way is to accustom the
thing to have a lining and the shape of a ribbon and to be solid, quite
solid in standing and to use heaviness in morning. It is light enough in
that. It has that shape nicely. Very nicely may not be exaggerating.
Very strongly may be sincerely fainting. May be strangely flattering.
May not be strange in everything. May not be strange to.


DIRT AND NOT COPPER.

Dirt and not copper makes a color darker. It makes the shape so heavy
and makes no melody harder.

It makes mercy and relaxation and even a strength to spread a table
fuller. There are more places not empty. They see cover.


NOTHING ELEGANT.

A charm a single charm is doubtful. If the red is rose and there is a
gate surrounding it, if inside is let in and there places change then
certainly something is upright. It is earnest.


MILDRED'S UMBRELLA.

A cause and no curve, a cause and loud enough, a cause and extra a loud
clash and an extra wagon, a sign of extra, a sac a small sac and an
established color and cunning, a slender grey and no ribbon, this means
a loss a great loss a restitution.


A METHOD OF A CLOAK.

A single climb to a line, a straight exchange to a cane, a desperate
adventure and courage and a clock, all this which is a system, which has
feeling, which has resignation and success, all makes an attractive
black silver.


A RED STAMP.

If lilies are lily white if they exhaust noise and distance and even
dust, if they dusty will dirt a surface that has no extreme grace, if
they do this and it is not necessary it is not at all necessary if they
do this they need a catalogue.


A BOX.

A large box is handily made of what is necessary to replace any
substance. Suppose an example is necessary, the plainer it is made the
more reason there is for some outward recognition that there is a
result.

A box is made sometimes and them to see to see to it neatly and to have
the holes stopped up makes it necessary to use paper.

A custom which is necessary when a box is used and taken is that a large
part of the time there are three which have different connections. The
one is on the table. The two are on the table. The three are on the
table. The one, one is the same length as is shown by the cover being
longer. The other is different there is more cover that shows it. The
other is different and that makes the corners have the same shade the
eight are in singular arrangement to make four necessary.

Lax, to have corners, to be lighter than some weight, to indicate a
wedding journey, to last brown and not curious, to be wealthy,
cigarettes are established by length and by doubling.

Left open, to be left pounded, to be left closed, to be circulating in
summer and winter, and sick color that is grey that is not dusty and red
shows, to be sure cigarettes do measure an empty length sooner than a
choice in color.

Winged, to be winged means that white is yellow and pieces pieces that
are brown are dust color if dust is washed off, then it is choice that
is to say it is fitting cigarettes sooner than paper.

An increase why is an increase idle, why is silver cloister, why is the
spark brighter, if it is brighter is there any result, hardly more than
ever.


A PLATE.

An occasion for a plate, an occasional resource is in buying and how
soon does washing enable a selection of the same thing neater. If the
party is small a clever song is in order.

Plates and a dinner set of colored china. Pack together a string and
enough with it to protect the centre, cause a considerable haste and
gather more as it is cooling, collect more trembling and not any even
trembling, cause a whole thing to be a church.

A sad size a size that is not sad is blue as every bit of blue is
precocious. A kind of green a game in green and nothing flat nothing
quite flat and more round, nothing a particular color strangely, nothing
breaking the losing of no little piece.

A splendid address a really splendid address is not shown by giving a
flower freely, it is not shown by a mark or by wetting.

Cut cut in white, cut in white so lately. Cut more than any other and
show it. Show it in the stem and in starting and in evening coming
complication.

A lamp is not the only sign of glass. The lamp and the cake are not the
only sign of stone. The lamp and the cake and the cover are not the only
necessity altogether.

A plan a hearty plan, a compressed disease and no coffee, not even a
card or a change to incline each way, a plan that has that excess and
that break is the one that shows filling.


A SELTZER BOTTLE.

Any neglect of many particles to a cracking, any neglect of this makes
around it what is lead in color and certainly discolor in silver. The
use of this is manifold. Supposing a certain time selected is assured,
suppose it is even necessary, suppose no other extract is permitted and
no more handling is needed, suppose the rest of the message is mixed
with a very long slender needle and even if it could be any black
border, supposing all this altogether made a dress and suppose it was
actual, suppose the mean way to state it was occasional, if you suppose
this in August and even more melodiously, if you suppose this even in
the necessary incident of there certainly being no middle in summer and
winter, suppose this and an elegant settlement a very elegant settlement
is more than of consequence, it is not final and sufficient and
substituted. This which was so kindly a present was constant.


A LONG DRESS.

What is the current that makes machinery, that makes it crackle, what is
the current that presents a long line and a necessary waist. What is
this current.

What is the wind, what is it.

Where is the serene length, it is there and a dark place is not a dark
place, only a white and red are black, only a yellow and green are blue,
a pink is scarlet, a bow is every color. A line distinguishes it. A line
just distinguishes it.


A RED HAT.

A dark grey, a very dark grey, a quite dark grey is monstrous
ordinarily, it is so monstrous because there is no red in it. If red is
in everything it is not necessary. Is that not an argument for any use
of it and even so is there any place that is better, is there any place
that has so much stretched out.


A BLUE COAT.

A blue coat is guided guided away, guided and guided away, that is the
particular color that is used for that length and not any width not even
more than a shadow.


A PIANO.

If the speed is open, if the color is careless, if the selection of a
strong scent is not awkward, if the button holder is held by all the
waving color and there is no color, not any color. If there is no dirt
in a pin and there can be none scarcely, if there is not then the place
is the same as up standing.

This is no dark custom and it even is not acted in any such a way that a
restraint is not spread. That is spread, it shuts and it lifts and
awkwardly not awkwardly the centre is in standing.


A CHAIR.

A widow in a wise veil and more garments shows that shadows are even. It
addresses no more, it shadows the stage and learning. A regular
arrangement, the severest and the most preserved is that which has the
arrangement not more than always authorised.

A suitable establishment, well housed, practical, patient and staring, a
suitable bedding, very suitable and not more particularly than
complaining, anything suitable is so necessary.

A fact is that when the direction is just like that, no more, longer,
sudden and at the same time not any sofa, the main action is that
without a blaming there is no custody.

Practice measurement, practice the sign that means that really means a
necessary betrayal, in showing that there is wearing.

Hope, what is a spectacle, a spectacle is the resemblance between the
circular side place and nothing else, nothing else.

To choose it is ended, it is actual and more than that it has it
certainly has the same treat, and a seat all that is practiced and more
easily much more easily ordinarily.

Pick a barn, a whole barn, and bend more slender accents than have ever
been necessary, shine in the darkness necessarily. Actually not aching,
actually not aching, a stubborn bloom is so artificial and even more
than that, it is a spectacle, it is a binding accident, it is animosity
and accentuation.

If the chance to dirty diminishing is necessary, if it is why is there
no complexion, why is there no rubbing, why is there no special
protection.


A FRIGHTFUL RELEASE.

A bag which was left and not only taken but turned away was not found.
The place was shown to be very like the last time. A piece was not
exchanged, not a bit of it, a piece was left over. The rest was
mismanaged.


A PURSE.

A purse was not green, it was not straw color, it was hardly seen and it
had a use a long use and the chain, the chain was never missing, it was
not misplaced, it showed that it was open, that is all that it showed.


A MOUNTED UMBRELLA.

What was the use of not leaving it there where it would hang what was
the use if there was no chance of ever seeing it come there and show
that it was handsome and right in the way it showed it. The lesson is to
learn that it does show it, that it shows it and that nothing, that
there is nothing, that there is no more to do about it and just so much
more is there plenty of reason for making an exchange.


A CLOTH.

Enough cloth is plenty and more, more is almost enough for that and
besides if there is no more spreading is there plenty of room for it.
Any occasion shows the best way.


MORE.

An elegant use of foliage and grace and a little piece of white cloth
and oil.

Wondering so winningly in several kinds of oceans is the reason that
makes red so regular and enthusiastic. The reason that there is more
snips are the same shining very colored rid of no round color.


A NEW CUP AND SAUCER.

Enthusiastically hurting a clouded yellow bud and saucer,
enthusiastically so is the bite in the ribbon.


OBJECTS.

Within, within the cut and slender joint alone, with sudden equals and
no more than three, two in the centre make two one side.

If the elbow is long and it is filled so then the best example is all
together.

The kind of show is made by squeezing.


EYE GLASSES.

A color in shaving, a saloon is well placed in the centre of an alley.


CUTLET.

A blind agitation is manly and uttermost.


CARELESS WATER.

No cup is broken in more places and mended, that is to say a plate is
broken and mending does do that it shows that culture is Japanese. It
shows the whole element of angels and orders. It does more to choosing
and it does more to that ministering counting. It does, it does change
in more water.

Supposing a single piece is a hair supposing more of them are orderly,
does that show that strength, does that show that joint, does that show
that balloon famously. Does it.


A PAPER.

A courteous occasion makes a paper show no such occasion and this makes
readiness and eyesight and likeness and a stool.


A DRAWING.

The meaning of this is entirely and best to say the mark, best to say it
best to show sudden places, best to make bitter, best to make the length
tall and nothing broader, anything between the half.


WATER RAINING.

Water astonishing and difficult altogether makes a meadow and a stroke.


COLD CLIMATE.

A season in yellow sold extra strings makes lying places.


MALACHITE.

The sudden spoon is the same in no size. The sudden spoon is the wound
in the decision.


AN UMBRELLA.

Coloring high means that the strange reason is in front not more in
front behind. Not more in front in peace of the dot.


A PETTICOAT.

A light white, a disgrace, an ink spot, a rosy charm.


A WAIST.

A star glide, a single frantic sullenness, a single financial grass
greediness.

Object that is in wood. Hold the pine, hold the dark, hold in the rush,
make the bottom.

A piece of crystal. A change, in a change that is remarkable there is no
reason to say that there was a time.

A woolen object gilded. A country climb is the best disgrace, a couple
of practices any of them in order is so left.


A TIME TO EAT.

A pleasant simple habitual and tyrannical and authorised and educated
and resumed and articulate separation. This is not tardy.


A LITTLE BIT OF A TUMBLER.

A shining indication of yellow consists in there having been more of the
same color than could have been expected when all four were bought. This
was the hope which made the six and seven have no use for any more
places and this necessarily spread into nothing. Spread into nothing.


A FIRE.

What was the use of a whole time to send and not send if there was to be
the kind of thing that made that come in. A letter was nicely sent.


A HANDKERCHIEF.

A winning of all the blessings, a sample not a sample because there is
no worry.


RED ROSES.

A cool red rose and a pink cut pink, a collapse and a sold hole, a
little less hot.


IN BETWEEN.

In between a place and candy is a narrow foot-path that shows more
mounting than anything, so much really that a calling meaning a bolster
measured a whole thing with that. A virgin a whole virgin is judged made
and so between curves and outlines and real seasons and more out glasses
and a perfectly unprecedented arrangement between old ladies and mild
colds there is no satin wood shining.


COLORED HATS.

Colored hats are necessary to show that curls are worn by an addition of
blank spaces, this makes the difference between single lines and broad
stomachs, the least thing is lightening, the least thing means a little
flower and a big delay a big delay that makes more nurses than little
women really little women. So clean is a light that nearly all of it
shows pearls and little ways. A large hat is tall and me and all custard
whole.


A FEATHER.

A feather is trimmed, it is trimmed by the light and the bug and the
post, it is trimmed by little leaning and by all sorts of mounted
reserves and loud volumes. It is surely cohesive.


A BROWN.

A brown which is not liquid not more so is relaxed and yet there is a
change, a news is pressing.


A LITTLE CALLED PAULINE.

A little called anything shows shudders.

Come and say what prints all day. A whole few watermelon. There is no
pope.

No cut in pennies and little dressing and choose wide soles and little
spats really little spices.

A little lace makes boils. This is not true.

Gracious of gracious and a stamp a blue green white bow a blue green
lean, lean on the top.

If it is absurd then it is leadish and nearly set in where there is a
tight head.

A peaceful life to arise her, noon and moon and moon. A letter a cold
sleeve a blanket a shaving house and nearly the best and regular window.

Nearer in fairy sea, nearer and farther, show white has lime in sight,
show a stitch of ten. Count, count more so that thicker and thicker is
leaning.

I hope she has her cow. Bidding a wedding, widening received treading,
little leading mention nothing.

Cough out cough out in the leather and really feather it is not for.

Please could, please could, jam it not plus more sit in when.


A SOUND.

Elephant beaten with candy and little pops and chews all bolts and
reckless reckless rats, this is this.


A TABLE.

A table means does it not my dear it means a whole steadiness. Is it
likely that a change.

A table means more than a glass even a looking glass is tall. A table
means necessary places and a revision a revision of a little thing it
means it does mean that there has been a stand, a stand where it did
shake.


SHOES.

To be a wall with a damper a stream of pounding way and nearly enough
choice makes a steady midnight. It is pus.

A shallow hole rose on red, a shallow hole in and in this makes ale
less. It shows shine.


A DOG.

A little monkey goes like a donkey that means to say that means to say
that more sighs last goes. Leave with it. A little monkey goes like a
donkey.


A WHITE HUNTER.

A white hunter is nearly crazy.


A LEAVE.

In the middle of a tiny spot and nearly bare there is a nice thing to
say that wrist is leading. Wrist is leading.


SUPPOSE AN EYES.

Suppose it is within a gate which open is open at the hour of closing
summer that is to say it is so.

All the seats are needing blackening. A white dress is in sign. A
soldier a real soldier has a worn lace a worn lace of different sizes
that is to say if he can read, if he can read he is a size to show
shutting up twenty-four.

Go red go red, laugh white.

Suppose a collapse in rubbed purr, in rubbed purr get.

Little sales ladies little sales ladies little saddles of mutton.

Little sales of leather and such beautiful beautiful, beautiful
beautiful.


A SHAWL.

A shawl is a hat and hurt and a red balloon and an under coat and a
sizer a sizer of talks.

A shawl is a wedding, a piece of wax a little build. A shawl.

Pick a ticket, pick it in strange steps and with hollows. There is
hollow hollow belt, a belt is a shawl.

A plate that has a little bobble, all of them, any so.

Please a round it is ticket.

It was a mistake to state that a laugh and a lip and a laid climb and a
depot and a cultivator and little choosing is a point it.


BOOK.

Book was there, it was there. Book was there. Stop it, stop it, it was a
cleaner, a wet cleaner and it was not where it was wet, it was not high,
it was directly placed back, not back again, back it was returned, it
was needless, it put a bank, a bank when, a bank care.

Suppose a man a realistic expression of resolute reliability suggests
pleasing itself white all white and no head does that mean soap. It does
not so. It means kind wavers and little chance to beside beside rest. A
plain.

Suppose ear rings, that is one way to breed, breed that. Oh chance to
say, oh nice old pole. Next best and nearest a pillar. Chest not
valuable, be papered.

Cover up cover up the two with a little piece of string and hope rose
and green, green.

Please a plate, put a match to the seam and really then really then,
really then it is a remark that joins many many lead games. It is a
sister and sister and a flower and a flower and a dog and a colored sky
a sky colored grey and nearly that nearly that let.


PEELED PENCIL, CHOKE.

Rub her coke.


IT WAS BLACK, BLACK TOOK.

Black ink best wheel bale brown.

Excellent not a hull house, not a pea soup, no bill no care, no precise
no past pearl pearl goat.


THIS IS THE DRESS, AIDER.

Aider, why aider why whow, whow stop touch, aider whow, aider stop the
muncher, muncher munchers.

A jack in kill her, a jack in, makes a meadowed king, makes a to let.




FOOD


ROASTBEEF; MUTTON; BREAKFAST; SUGAR; CRANBERRIES; MILK; EGGS; APPLE;
TAILS; LUNCH; CUPS; RHUBARB; SINGLE; FISH; CAKE; CUSTARD; POTATOES;
ASPARAGUS; BUTTER; END OF SUMMER; SAUSAGES; CELERY; VEAL; VEGETABLE;
COOKING; CHICKEN; PASTRY; CREAM; CUCUMBER; DINNER; DINING; EATING;
SALAD; SAUCE; SALMON; ORANGE; COCOA; AND CLEAR SOUP AND ORANGES AND
OATMEAL; SALAD DRESSING AND AN ARTICHOKE; A CENTRE IN A TABLE.


ROASTBEEF.

In the inside there is sleeping, in the outside there is reddening, in
the morning there is meaning, in the evening there is feeling. In the
evening there is feeling. In feeling anything is resting, in feeling
anything is mounting, in feeling there is resignation, in feeling there
is recognition, in feeling there is recurrence and entirely mistaken
there is pinching. All the standards have steamers and all the curtains
have bed linen and all the yellow has discrimination and all the circle
has circling. This makes sand.

Very well. Certainly the length is thinner and the rest, the round rest
has a longer summer. To shine, why not shine, to shine, to station, to
enlarge, to hurry the measure all this means nothing if there is
singing, if there is singing then there is the resumption.

The change the dirt, not to change dirt means that there is no beefsteak
and not to have that is no obstruction, it is so easy to exchange
meaning, it is so easy to see the difference. The difference is that a
plain resource is not entangled with thickness and it does not mean that
thickness shows such cutting, it does mean that a meadow is useful and a
cow absurd. It does not mean that there are tears, it does not mean that
exudation is cumbersome, it means no more than a memory, a choice and a
reëstablishment, it means more than any escape from a surrounding extra.
All the time that there is use there is use and any time there is a
surface there is a surface, and every time there is an exception there
is an exception and every time there is a division there is a dividing.
Any time there is a surface there is a surface and every time there is a
suggestion there is a suggestion and every time there is silence there
is silence and every time that is languid there is that there then and
not oftener, not always, not particular, tender and changing and
external and central and surrounded and singular and simple and the same
and the surface and the circle and the shine and the succor and the
white and the same and the better and the red and the same and the
centre and the yellow and the tender and the better, and altogether.

Considering the circumstances there is no occasion for a reduction,
considering that there is no pealing there is no occasion for an
obligation, considering that there is no outrage there is no necessity
for any reparation, considering that there is no particle sodden there
is no occasion for deliberation. Considering everything and which way
the turn is tending, considering everything why is there no restraint,
considering everything what makes the place settle and the plate
distinguish some specialties. The whole thing is not understood and this
is not strange considering that there is no education, this is not
strange because having that certainly does show the difference in
cutting, it shows that when there is turning there is no distress.

In kind, in a control, in a period, in the alteration of pigeons, in
kind cuts and thick and thin spaces, in kind ham and different colors,
the length of leaning a strong thing outside not to make a sound but to
suggest a crust, the principal taste is when there is a whole chance to
be reasonable, this does not mean that there is overtaking, this means
nothing precious, this means clearly that the chance to exercise is a
social success. So then the sound is not obtrusive. Suppose it is
obtrusive suppose it is. What is certainly the desertion is not a
reduced description, a description is not a birthday.

Lovely snipe and tender turn, excellent vapor and slender butter, all
the splinter and the trunk, all the poisonous darkening drunk, all the
joy in weak success, all the joyful tenderness, all the section and the
tea, all the stouter symmetry.

Around the size that is small, inside the stern that is the middle,
besides the remains that are praying, inside the between that is
turning, all the region is measuring and melting is exaggerating.

Rectangular ribbon does not mean that there is no eruption it means that
if there is no place to hold there is no place to spread. Kindness is
not earnest, it is not assiduous it is not revered.

Room to comb chickens and feathers and ripe purple, room to curve single
plates and large sets and second silver, room to send everything away,
room to save heat and distemper, room to search a light that is simpler,
all room has no shadow.

There is no use there is no use at all in smell, in taste, in teeth, in
toast, in anything, there is no use at all and the respect is mutual.

Why should that which is uneven, that which is resumed, that which is
tolerable why should all this resemble a smell, a thing is there, it
whistles, it is not narrower, why is there no obligation to stay away
and yet courage, courage is everywhere and the best remains to stay.

If there could be that which is contained in that which is felt there
would be a chair where there are chairs and there would be no more
denial about a clatter. A clatter is not a smell. All this is good.

The Saturday evening which is Sunday is every week day. What choice is
there when there is a difference. A regulation is not active.
Thirstiness is not equal division.

Anyway, to be older and ageder is not a surfeit nor a suction, it is not
dated and careful, it is not dirty. Any little thing is clean, rubbing
is black. Why should ancient lambs be goats and young colts and never
beef, why should they, they should because there is so much difference
in age.

A sound, a whole sound is not separation, a whole sound is in an order.

Suppose there is a pigeon, suppose there is.

Looseness, why is there a shadow in a kitchen, there is a shadow in a
kitchen because every little thing is bigger.

The time when there are four choices and there are four choices in a
difference, the time when there are four choices there is a kind and
there is a kind. There is a kind. There is a kind. Supposing there is a
bone, there is a bone. Supposing there are bones. There are bones. When
there are bones there is no supposing there are bones. There are bones
and there is that consuming. The kindly way to feel separating is to
have a space between. This shows a likeness.

Hope in gates, hope in spoons, hope in doors, hope in tables, no hope in
daintiness and determination. Hope in dates.

Tin is not a can and a stove is hardly. Tin is not necessary and neither
is a stretcher. Tin is never narrow and thick.

Color is in coal. Coal is outlasting roasting and a spoonful, a whole
spoon that is full is not spilling. Coal any coal is copper.

Claiming nothing, not claiming anything, not a claim in everything,
collecting claiming, all this makes a harmony, it even makes a
succession.

Sincerely gracious one morning, sincerely graciously trembling, sincere
in gracious eloping, all this makes a furnace and a blanket. All this
shows quantity.

Like an eye, not so much more, not any searching, no compliments.

Please be the beef, please beef, pleasure is not wailing. Please beef,
please be carved clear, please be a case of consideration.

Search a neglect. A sale, any greatness is a stall and there is no
memory, there is no clear collection.

A satin sight, what is a trick, no trick is mountainous and the color,
all the rush is in the blood.

Bargaining for a little, bargain for a touch, a liberty, an
estrangement, a characteristic turkey.

Please spice, please no name, place a whole weight, sink into a standard
rising, raise a circle, choose a right around, make the resonance
accounted and gather green any collar.

To bury a slender chicken, to raise an old feather, to surround a
garland and to bake a pole splinter, to suggest a repose and to settle
simply, to surrender one another, to succeed saving simpler, to satisfy
a singularity and not to be blinder, to sugar nothing darker and to read
redder, to have the color better, to sort out dinner, to remain
together, to surprise no sinner, to curve nothing sweeter, to continue
thinner, to increase in resting recreation to design string not dimmer.

Cloudiness what is cloudiness, is it a lining, is it a roll, is it
melting.

The sooner there is jerking, the sooner freshness is tender, the sooner
the round it is not round the sooner it is withdrawn in cutting, the
sooner the measure means service, the sooner there is chinking, the
sooner there is sadder than salad, the sooner there is none do her, the
sooner there is no choice, the sooner there is a gloom freer, the same
sooner and more sooner, this is no error in hurry and in pressure and in
opposition to consideration.

A recital, what is a recital, it is an organ and use does not strengthen
valor, it soothes medicine.

A transfer, a large transfer, a little transfer, some transfer, clouds
and tracks do transfer, a transfer is not neglected.

Pride, when is there perfect pretence, there is no more than yesterday
and ordinary.

A sentence of a vagueness that is violence is authority and a mission
and stumbling and also certainly also a prison. Calmness, calm is beside
the plate and in way in. There is no turn in terror. There is no volume
in sound.

There is coagulation in cold and there is none in prudence. Something
is preserved and the evening is long and the colder spring has sudden
shadows in a sun. All the stain is tender and lilacs really lilacs are
disturbed. Why is the perfect reëstablishment practiced and prized, why
is it composed. The result the pure result is juice and size and baking
and exhibition and nonchalance and sacrifice and volume and a section in
division and the surrounding recognition and horticulture and no murmur.
This is a result. There is no superposition and circumstance, there is
hardness and a reason and the rest and remainder. There is no delight
and no mathematics.


MUTTON.

A letter which can wither, a learning which can suffer and an outrage
which is simultaneous is principal.

Student, students are merciful and recognised they chew something.

Hate rests that is solid and sparse and all in a shape and largely very
largely. Interleaved and successive and a sample of smell all this makes
a certainty a shade.

Light curls very light curls have no more curliness than soup. This is
not a subject.

Change a single stream of denting and change it hurriedly, what does it
express, it expresses nausea. Like a very strange likeness and pink,
like that and not more like that than the same resemblance and not more
like that than no middle space in cutting.

An eye glass, what is an eye glass, it is water. A splendid specimen,
what is it when it is little and tender so that there are parts. A
centre can place and four are no more and two and two are not middle.

Melting and not minding, safety and powder, a particular recollection
and a sincere solitude all this makes a shunning so thorough and so
unrepeated and surely if there is anything left it is a bone. It is not
solitary.

Any space is not quiet it is so likely to be shiny. Darkness very dark
darkness is sectional. There is a way to see in onion and surely very
surely rhubarb and a tomato, surely very surely there is that seeding. A
little thing in is a little thing.

Mud and water were not present and not any more of either. Silk and
stockings were not present and not any more of either. A receptacle and
a symbol and no monster were present and no more. This made a piece
show and was it a kindness, it can be asked was it a kindness to have it
warmer, was it a kindness and does gliding mean more. Does it.

Does it dirty a ceiling. It does not. Is it dainty, it is if prices are
sweet. Is it lamentable, it is not if there is no undertaker. Is it
curious, it is not when there is youth. All this makes a line, it even
makes makes no more. All this makes cherries. The reason that there is a
suggestion in vanity is due to this that there is a burst of mixed
music.

A temptation any temptation is an exclamation if there are misdeeds and
little bones. It is not astonishing that bones mingle as they vary not
at all and in any case why is a bone outstanding, it is so because the
circumstance that does not make a cake and character is so easily
churned and cherished.

Mouse and mountain and a quiver, a quaint statue and pain in an exterior
and silence more silence louder shows salmon a mischief intender. A
cake, a real salve made of mutton and liquor, a specially retained
rinsing and an established cork and blazing, this which resignation
influences and restrains, restrains more altogether. A sign is the
specimen spoken.

A meal in mutton, mutton, why is lamb cheaper, it is cheaper because so
little is more. Lecture, lecture and repeat instruction.


BREAKFAST.

A change, a final change includes potatoes. This is no authority for the
abuse of cheese. What language can instruct any fellow.

A shining breakfast, a breakfast shining, no dispute, no practice,
nothing, nothing at all.

A sudden slice changes the whole plate, it does so suddenly.

An imitation, more imitation, imitation succeed imitations.

Anything that is decent, anything that is present, a calm and a cook and
more singularly still a shelter, all these show the need of clamor. What
is the custom, the custom is in the centre.

What is a loving tongue and pepper and more fish than there is when
tears many tears are necessary. The tongue and the salmon, there is not
salmon when brown is a color, there is salmon when there is no meaning
to an early morning being pleasanter. There is no salmon, there are no
tea-cups, there are the same kind of mushes as are used as stomachers
by the eating hopes that makes eggs delicious. Drink is likely to stir a
certain respect for an egg cup and more water melon than was ever eaten
yesterday. Beer is neglected and cocoanut is famous. Coffee all coffee
and a sample of soup all soup these are the choice of a baker. A white
cup means a wedding. A wet cup means a vacation. A strong cup means an
especial regulation. A single cup means a capital arrangement between
the drawer and the place that is open.

Price a price is not in language, it is not in custom, it is not in
praise.

A colored loss, why is there no leisure. If the persecution is so
outrageous that nothing is solemn is there any occasion for persuasion.

A grey turn to a top and bottom, a silent pocketful of much heating, all
the pliable succession of surrendering makes an ingenious joy.

A breeze in a jar and even then silence, a special anticipation in a
rack, a gurgle a whole gurgle and more cheese than almost anything, is
this an astonishment, does this incline more than the original division
between a tray and a talking arrangement and even then a calling into
another room gently with some chicken in any way.

A bent way that is a way to declare that the best is all together, a
bent way shows no result, it shows a slight restraint, it shows a
necessity for retraction.

Suspect a single buttered flower, suspect it certainly, suspect it and
then glide, does that not alter a counting.

A hurt mended stick, a hurt mended cup, a hurt mended article of
exceptional relaxation and annoyance, a hurt mended, hurt and mended is
so necessary that no mistake is intended.

What is more likely than a roast, nothing really and yet it is never
disappointed singularly.

A steady cake, any steady cake is perfect and not plain, any steady cake
has a mounting reason and more than that it has singular crusts. A
season of more is a season that is instead. A season of many is not more
a season than most.

Take no remedy lightly, take no urging intently, take no separation
leniently, beware of no lake and no larder.

Burden the cracked wet soaking sack heavily, burden it so that it is an
institution in fright and in climate and in the best plan that there can
be.

An ordinary color, a color is that strange mixture which makes, which
does make which does not make a ripe juice, which does not make a mat.

A work which is a winding a real winding of the cloaking of a relaxing
rescue. This which is so cool is not dusting, it is not dirtying in
smelling, it could use white water, it could use more extraordinarily
and in no solitude altogether. This which is so not winsome and not
widened and really not so dipped as dainty and really dainty, very
dainty, ordinarily, dainty, a dainty, not in that dainty and dainty. If
the time is determined, if it is determined and there is reunion there
is reunion with that then outline, then there is in that a piercing
shutter, all of a piercing shouter, all of a quite weather, all of a
withered exterior, all of that in most violent likely.

An excuse is not dreariness, a single plate is not butter, a single
weight is not excitement, a solitary crumbling is not only martial.

A mixed protection, very mixed with the same actual intentional
unstrangeness and riding, a single action caused necessarily is not more
a sign than a minister.

Seat a knife near a cage and very near a decision and more nearly a
timely working cat and scissors. Do this temporarily and make no more
mistake in standing. Spread it all and arrange the white place, does
this show in the house, does it not show in the green that is not
necessary for that color, does it not even show in the explanation and
singularly not at all stationary.


SUGAR.

A violent luck and a whole sample and even then quiet.

Water is squeezing, water is almost squeezing on lard. Water, water is a
mountain and it is selected and it is so practical that there is no use
in money. A mind under is exact and so it is necessary to have a mouth
and eye glasses.

A question of sudden rises and more time than awfulness is so easy and
shady. There is precisely that noise.

A peck a small piece not privately overseen, not at all not a slice, not
at all crestfallen and open, not at all mounting and chaining and evenly
surpassing, all the bidding comes to tea.

A separation is not tightly in worsted and sauce, it is so kept well and
sectionally.

Put it in the stew, put it to shame. A little slight shadow and a solid
fine furnace.

The teasing is tender and trying and thoughtful.

The line which sets sprinkling to be a remedy is beside the best cold.

A puzzle, a monster puzzle, a heavy choking, a neglected Tuesday.

Wet crossing and a likeness, any likeness, a likeness has blisters, it
has that and teeth, it has the staggering blindly and a little green,
any little green is ordinary.

One, two and one, two, nine, second and five and that.

A blaze, a search in between, a cow, only any wet place, only this tune.

Cut a gas jet uglier and then pierce pierce in between the next and
negligence. Choose the rate to pay and pet pet very much. A collection
of all around, a signal poison, a lack of languor and more hurts at
ease.

A white bird, a colored mine, a mixed orange, a dog.

Cuddling comes in continuing a change.

A piece of separate outstanding rushing is so blind with open delicacy.

A canoe is orderly. A period is solemn. A cow is accepted.

A nice old chain is widening, it is absent, it is laid by.


CRANBERRIES.

Could there not be a sudden date, could there not be in the present
settlement of old age pensions, could there not be by a witness, could
there be.

Count the chain, cut the grass, silence the noon and murder flies. See
the basting undip the chart, see the way the kinds are best seen from
the rest, from that and untidy.

Cut the whole space into twenty-four spaces and then and then is there a
yellow color, there is but it is smelled, it is then put where it is and
nothing stolen.

A remarkable degree of red means that, a remarkable exchange is made.

Climbing altogether in when there is a solid chance of soiling no more
than a dirty thing, coloring all of it in steadying is jelly.

Just as it is suffering, just as it is succeeded, just as it is moist so
is there no countering.


MILK.

A white egg and a colored pan and a cabbage showing settlement, a
constant increase.

A cold in a nose, a single cold nose makes an excuse. Two are more
necessary.

All the goods are stolen, all the blisters are in the cup.

Cooking, cooking is the recognition between sudden and nearly sudden
very little and all large holes.

A real pint, one that is open and closed and in the middle is so bad.

Tender colds, seen eye holders, all work, the best of change, the
meaning, the dark red, all this and bitten, really bitten.

Guessing again and golfing again and the best men, the very best men.


MILK.

Climb up in sight climb in the whole utter needles and a guess a whole
guess is hanging. Hanging hanging.


EGGS.

Kind height, kind in the right stomach with a little sudden mill.

Cunning shawl, cunning shawl to be steady.

In white in white handkerchiefs with little dots in a white belt all
shadows are singular they are singular and procured and relieved.

No that is not the cows shame and a precocious sound, it is a bite.

Cut up alone the paved way which is harm. Harm is old boat and a likely
dash.


APPLE.

Apple plum, carpet steak, seed clam, colored wine, calm seen, cold
cream, best shake, potato, potato and no no gold work with pet, a green
seen is called bake and change sweet is bready, a little piece a little
piece please.

A little piece please. Cane again to the presupposed and ready
eucalyptus tree, count out sherry and ripe plates and little corners of
a kind of ham. This is use.


TAILS.

Cold pails, cold with joy no joy.

A tiny seat that means meadows and a lapse of cuddles with cheese and
nearly bats, all this went messed. The post placed a loud loose sprain.
A rest is no better. It is better yet. All the time.


LUNCH.

Luck in loose plaster makes holy gauge and nearly that, nearly more
states, more states come in town light kite, blight not white.

A little lunch is a break in skate a little lunch so slimy, a west end
of a board line is that which shows a little beneath so that necessity
is a silk under wear. That is best wet. It is so natural, and why is
there flake, there is flake to explain exhaust.

A real cold hen is nervous is nervous with a towel with a spool with
real beads. It is mostly an extra sole nearly all that shaved, shaved
with an old mountain, more than that bees more than that dinner and a
bunch of likes that is to say the hearts of onions aim less.

Cold coffee with a corn a corn yellow and green mass is a gem.


CUPS.

A single example of excellence is in the meat. A bent stick is surging
and might all might is mental. A grand clothes is searching out a candle
not that wheatly not that by more than an owl and a path. A ham is proud
of cocoanut.

A cup is neglected by being all in size. It is a handle and meadows and
sugar any sugar.

A cup is neglected by being full of size. It shows no shade, in come
little wood cuts and blessing and nearly not that not with a wild bought
in, not at all so polite, not nearly so behind.

Cups crane in. They need a pet oyster, they need it so hoary and nearly
choice. The best slam is utter. Nearly be freeze.

Why is a cup a stir and a behave. Why is it so seen.

A cup is readily shaded, it has in between no sense that is to say
music, memory, musical memory.

Peanuts blame, a half sand is holey and nearly.


RHUBARB.

Rhubarb is susan not susan not seat in bunch toys not wild and laughable
not in little places not in neglect and vegetable not in fold coal age
not please.


SINGLE FISH.

Single fish single fish single fish egg-plant single fish sight.

A sweet win and not less noisy than saddle and more ploughing and nearly
well painted by little things so.

Please shade it a play. It is necessary and beside the large sort is
puff.

Every way oakly, please prune it near. It is so found.

It is not the same.


CAKE.

Cake cast in went to be and needles wine needles are such.

This is today. A can experiment is that which makes a town, makes a town
dirty, it is little please. We came back. Two bore, bore what, a mussed
ash, ash when there is tin. This meant cake. It was a sign.

Another time there was extra a hat pin sought long and this dark made a
display. The result was yellow. A caution, not a caution to be.

It is no use to cause a foolish number. A blanket stretch a cloud, a
shame, all that bakery can tease, all that is beginning and yesterday
yesterday we had it met. It means some change. No some day.

A little leaf upon a scene an ocean any where there, a bland and likely
in the stream a recollection green land. Why white.


CUSTARD.

Custard is this. It has aches, aches when. Not to be. Not to be
narrowly. This makes a whole little hill.

It is better than a little thing that has mellow real mellow. It is
better than lakes whole lakes, it is better than seeding.


POTATOES.

Real potatoes cut in between.


POTATOES.

In the preparation of cheese, in the preparation of crackers, in the
preparation of butter, in it.


ROAST POTATOES.

Roast potatoes for.


ASPARAGUS.

Asparagus in a lean in a lean to hot. This makes it art and it is wet
wet weather wet weather wet.


BUTTER.

Boom in boom in, butter. Leave a grain and show it, show it. I spy.

It is a need it is a need that a flower a state flower. It is a need
that a state rubber. It is a need that a state rubber is sweet and sight
and a swelled stretch. It is a need. It is a need that state rubber.

Wood a supply. Clean little keep a strange, estrange on it.

Make a little white, no and not with pit, pit on in within.


END OF SUMMER.

Little eyelets that have hammer and a check with stripes between a
lounge, in wit, in a rested development.


SAUSAGES.

Sausages in between a glass.

There is read butter. A loaf of it is managed. Wake a question. Eat an
instant, answer.

A reason for bed is this, that a decline, any decline is poison, poison
is a toe a toe extractor, this means a solemn change. Hanging.

No evil is wide, any extra in leaf is so strange and singular a red
breast.


CELERY.

Celery tastes tastes where in curled lashes and little bits and mostly
in remains.

A green acre is so selfish and so pure and so enlivened.


VEAL.

Very well very well, washing is old, washing is washing.

Cold soup, cold soup clear and particular and a principal a principal
question to put into.


VEGETABLE.

What is cut. What is cut by it. What is cut by it in.

It was a cress a crescent a cross and an unequal scream, it was
upslanting, it was radiant and reasonable with little ins and red.

News. News capable of glees, cut in shoes, belike under pump of wide
chalk, all this combing.


WAY LAY VEGETABLE.

Leaves in grass and mow potatoes, have a skip, hurry you up flutter.

Suppose it is ex a cake suppose it is new mercy and leave charlotte and
nervous bed rows. Suppose it is meal. Suppose it is sam.


COOKING.

Alas, alas the pull alas the bell alas the coach in china, alas the
little put in leaf alas the wedding butter meat, alas the receptacle,
alas the back shape of mussle, mussle and soda.


CHICKEN.

Pheasant and chicken, chicken is a peculiar third.


CHICKEN.

Alas a dirty word, alas a dirty third alas a dirty third, alas a dirty
bird.


CHICKEN.

Alas a doubt in case of more go to say what it is cress. What is it.
Mean. Potato. Loaves.


CHICKEN.

Stick stick call then, stick stick sticking, sticking with a chicken.
Sticking in a extra succession, sticking in.


CHAIN-BOATS.

Chain-boats are merry, are merry blew, blew west, carpet.


PASTRY.

Cutting shade, cool spades and little last beds, make violet, violet
when.


CREAM.

In a plank, in a play sole, in a heated red left tree there is shut in
specs with salt be where. This makes an eddy. Necessary.


CREAM.

Cream cut. Any where crumb. Left hop chambers.


CUCUMBER.

Not a razor less, not a razor, ridiculous pudding, red and relet put in,
rest in a slender go in selecting, rest in, rest in in white widening.


DINNER.

Not a little fit, not a little fit sun sat in shed more mentally.

Let us why, let us why weight, let us why winter chess, let us why way.

Only a moon to soup her, only that in the sell never never be the cocups
nice be, shatter it they lay.

Egg ear nuts, look a bout. Shoulder. Let it strange, sold in bell next
herds.

It was a time when in the acres in late there was a wheel that shot a
burst of land and needless are niggers and a sample sample set of old
eaten butterflies with spoons, all of it to be are fled and measure make
it, make it, yet all the one in that we see where shall not it set with
a left and more so, yes there add when the longer not it shall the best
in the way when all be with when shall not for there with see and chest
how for another excellent and excellent and easy easy excellent and easy
express e c, all to be nice all to be no so. All to be no so no so. All
to be not a white old chat churner. Not to be any example of an edible
apple in.


DINING.

Dining is west.


EATING.

Eat ting, eating a grand old man said roof and never never re soluble
burst, not a near ring not a bewildered neck, not really any such bay.

Is it so a noise to be is it a least remain to rest, is it a so old say
to be, is it a leading are been. Is it so, is it so, is it so, is it so
is it so is it so.

Eel us eel us with no no pea no pea cool, no pea cool cooler, no pea
cooler with a land a land cost in, with a land cost in stretches.

Eating he heat eating he heat it eating, he heat it heat eating. He heat
eating.

A little piece of pay of pay owls owls such as pie, bolsters.

Will leap beat, willie well all. The rest rest oxen occasion occasion to
be so purred, so purred how.

It was a ham it was a square come well it was a square remain, a square
remain not it a bundle, not it a bundle so is a grip, a grip to shed bay
leave bay leave draught, bay leave draw cider in low, cider in low and
george. George is a mass.


EATING.

It was a shame it was a shame to stare to stare and double and relieve
relieve be cut up show as by the elevation of it and out out more in the
steady where the come and on and the all the shed and that.

It was a garden and belows belows straight. It was a pea, a pea pour it
in its not a succession, not it a simple, not it a so election, election
with.


SALAD.

It is a winning cake.


SAUCE.

What is bay labored what is all be section, what is no much. Sauce sam
in.


SALMON.

It was a peculiar bin a bin fond in beside.


ORANGE.

Why is a feel oyster an egg stir. Why is it orange centre.

A show at tick and loosen loosen it so to speak sat.

It was an extra leaker with a see spoon, it was an extra licker with a
see spoon.


ORANGE.

A type oh oh new new not no not knealer knealer of old show beefsteak,
neither neither.


ORANGES.

Build is all right.


ORANGE IN.

Go lack go lack use to her.

Cocoa and clear soup and oranges and oat-meal.

Whist bottom whist close, whist clothes, woodling.

Cocoa and clear soup and oranges and oat-meal.

Pain soup, suppose it is question, suppose it is butter, real is, real
is only, only excreate, only excreate a no since.

A no, a no since, a no since when, a no since when since, a no since
when since a no since when since, a no since, a no since when since, a
no since, a no, a no since a no since, a no since, a no since.


SALAD DRESSING AND AN ARTICHOKE.

Please pale hot, please cover rose, please acre in the red stranger,
please butter all the beef-steak with regular feel faces.


SALAD DRESSING AND AN ARTICHOKE.

It was please it was please carriage cup in an ice-cream, in an
ice-cream it was too bended bended with scissors and all this time. A
whole is inside a part, a part does go away, a hole is red leaf. No
choice was where there was and a second and a second.


A CENTRE IN A TABLE.

It was a way a day, this made some sum. Suppose a cod liver a cod liver
is an oil, suppose a cod liver oil is tunny, suppose a cod liver oil
tunny is pressed suppose a cod liver oil tunny pressed is china and
secret with a bestow a bestow reed, a reed to be a reed to be, in a reed
to be.

Next to me next to a folder, next to a folder some waiter, next to a
foldersome waiter and re letter and read her. Read her with her for
less.




ROOMS


Act so that there is no use in a centre. A wide action is not a width. A
preparation is given to the ones preparing. They do not eat who mention
silver and sweet. There was an occupation.

A whole centre and a border make hanging a way of dressing. This which
is not why there is a voice is the remains of an offering. There was no
rental.

So the tune which is there has a little piece to play, and the exercise
is all there is of a fast. The tender and true that makes no width to
hew is the time that there is question to adopt.

To begin the placing there is no wagon. There is no change lighter. It
was done. And then the spreading, that was not accomplishing that needed
standing and yet the time was not so difficult as they were not all in
place. They had no change. They were not respected. They were that, they
did it so much in the matter and this showed that that settlement was
not condensed. It was spread there. Any change was in the ends of the
centre. A heap was heavy. There was no change.

Burnt and behind and lifting a temporary stone and lifting more than a
drawer.

The instance of there being more is an instance of more. The shadow is
not shining in the way there is a black line. The truth has come. There
is a disturbance. Trusting to a baker's boy meant that there would be
very much exchanging and anyway what is the use of a covering to a door.
There is a use, they are double.

If the centre has the place then there is distribution. That is natural.
There is a contradiction and naturally returning there comes to be both
sides and the centre. That can be seen from the description.

The author of all that is in there behind the door and that is entering
in the morning. Explaining darkening and expecting relating is all of a
piece. The stove is bigger. It was of a shape that made no audience
bigger if the opening is assumed why should there not be kneeling. Any
force which is bestowed on a floor shows rubbing. This is so nice and
sweet and yet there comes the change, there comes the time to press
more air. This does not mean the same as disappearance.

A little lingering lion and a Chinese chair, all the handsome cheese
which is stone, all of it and a choice, a choice of a blotter. If it is
difficult to do it one way there is no place of similar trouble. None.
The whole arrangement is established. The end of which is that there is
a suggestion, a suggestion that there can be a different whiteness to a
wall. This was thought.

A page to a corner means that the shame is no greater when the table is
longer. A glass is of any height, it is higher, it is simpler and if it
were placed there would not be any doubt.

Something that is an erection is that which stands and feeds and
silences a tin which is swelling. This makes no diversion that is to say
what can please exaltation, that which is cooking.

A shine is that which when covered changes permission. An enclosure
blends with the same that is to say there is blending. A blend is that
which holds no mice and this is not because of a floor it is because of
nothing, it is not in a vision.

A fact is that when the place was replaced all was left that was stored
and all was retained that would not satisfy more than another. The
question is this, is it possible to suggest more to replace that thing.
This question and this perfect denial does make the time change all the
time.

The sister was not a mister. Was this a surprise. It was. The conclusion
came when there was no arrangement. All the time that there was a
question there was a decision. Replacing a casual acquaintance with an
ordinary daughter does not make a son.

It happened in a way that the time was perfect and there was a growth of
a whole dividing time so that where formerly there was no mistake there
was no mistake now. For instance before when there was a separation
there was waiting, now when there is separation there is the division
between intending and departing. This made no more mixture than there
would be if there had been no change.

A little sign of an entrance is the one that made it alike. If it were
smaller it was not alike and it was so much smaller that a table was
bigger. A table was much bigger, very much bigger. Changing that made
nothing bigger, it did not make anything bigger littler, it did not
hinder wood from not being used as leather. And this was so charming.
Harmony is so essential. Is there pleasure when there is a passage,
there is when every room is open. Every room is open when there are not
four, there were there and surely there were four, there were two
together. There is no resemblance.

A single speed, the reception of table linen, all the wonder of six
little spoons, there is no exercise.

The time came when there was a birthday. Every day was no excitement and
a birthday was added, it was added on Monday, this made the memory
clear, this which was a speech showed the chair in the middle where
there was copper.

Alike and a snail, this means Chinamen, it does there is no doubt that
to be right is more than perfect there is no doubt and glass is
confusing it confuses the substance which was of a color. Then came the
time for discrimination, it came then and it was never mentioned it was
so triumphant, it showed the whole head that had a hole and should have
a hole it showed the resemblance between silver.

Startling a starving husband is not disagreeable. The reason that
nothing is hidden is that there is no suggestion of silence. No song is
sad. A lesson is of consequence.

Blind and weak and organised and worried and betrothed and resumed and
also asked to a fast and always asked to consider and never startled and
not at all bloated, this which is no rarer than frequently is not so
astonishing when hair brushing is added. There is quiet, there certainly
is.

No eye-glasses are rotten, no window is useless and yet if air will not
come in there is a speech ready, there always is and there is no
dimness, not a bit of it.

All along the tendency to deplore the absence of more has not been
authorised. It comes to mean that with burning there is that pleasant
state of stupefication. Then there is a way of earning a living. Who is
a man.

A silence is not indicated by any motion, less is indicated by a motion,
more is not indicated it is enthralled. So sullen and so low, so much
resignation, so much refusal and so much place for a lower and an upper,
so much and yet more silence, why is not sleeping a feat why is it not
and when is there some discharge when. There never is.

If comparing a piece that is a size that is recognised as not a size but
a piece, comparing a piece with what is not recognised but what is used
as it is held by holding, comparing these two comes to be repeated.
Suppose they are put together, suppose that there is an interruption,
supposing that beginning again they are not changed as to position,
suppose all this and suppose that any five two of whom are not
separating suppose that the five are not consumed. Is there an exchange,
is there a resemblance to the sky which is admitted to be there and the
stars which can be seen. Is there. That was a question. There was no
certainty. Fitting a failing meant that any two were indifferent and yet
they were all connecting that, they were all connecting that
consideration. This did not determine rejoining a letter. This did not
make letters smaller. It did.

The stamp that is not only torn but also fitting is not any symbol. It
suggests nothing. A sack that has no opening suggests more and the loss
is not commensurate. The season gliding and the torn hangings receiving
mending all this shows an example, it shows the force of sacrifice and
likeness and disaster and a reason.

The time when there is not the question is only seen when there is a
shower. Any little thing is water.

There was a whole collection made. A damp cloth, an oyster, a single
mirror, a manikin, a student, a silent star, a single spark, a little
movement and the bed is made. This shows the disorder, it does, it shows
more likeness than anything else, it shows the single mind that directs
an apple. All the coats have a different shape, that does not mean that
they differ in color, it means a union between use and exercise and a
horse.

A plain hill, one is not that which is not white and red and green, a
plain hill makes no sunshine, it shows that without a disturber. So the
shape is there and the color and the outline and the miserable centre,
it is not very likely that there is a centre, a hill is a hill and no
hill is contained in a pink tender descender.

A can containing a curtain is a solid sentimental usage. The trouble in
both eyes does not come from the same symmetrical carpet, it comes from
there being no more disturbance than in little paper. This does show the
teeth, it shows color.

A measure is that which put up so that it shows the length has a steel
construction. Tidiness is not delicacy, it does not destroy the whole
piece, certainly not it has been measured and nothing has been cut off
and even if that has been lost there is a name, no name is signed and
left over, not any space is fitted so that moving about is plentiful.
Why is there so much resignation in a package, why is there rain, all
the same the chance has come, there is no bell to ring.

A package and a filter and even a funnel, all this together makes a
scene and supposing the question arises is hair curly, is it dark and
dusty, supposing that question arises, is brushing necessary, is it,
the whole special suddenness commences then, there is no delusion.

A cape is a cover, a cape is not a cover in summer, a cape is a cover
and the regulation is that there is no such weather. A cape is not
always a cover, a cape is not a cover when there is another, there is
always something in that thing in establishing a disposition to put
wetting where it will not do more harm. There is always that disposition
and in a way there is some use in not mentioning changing and in
establishing the temperature, there is some use in it as establishing
all that lives dimmer freer and there is no dinner in the middle of
anything. There is no such thing.

Why is a pale white not paler than blue, why is a connection made by a
stove, why is the example which is mentioned not shown to be the same,
why is there no adjustment between the place and the separate attention.
Why is there a choice in gamboling. Why is there no necessary dull
stable, why is there a single piece of any color, why is there that
sensible silence. Why is there the resistance in a mixture, why is there
no poster, why is there that in the window, why is there no suggester,
why is there no window, why is there no oyster closer. Why is there a
circular diminisher, why is there a bather, why is there no scraper, why
is there a dinner, why is there a bell ringer, why is there a duster,
why is there a section of a similar resemblance, why is there that
scissor.

South, south which is a wind is not rain, does silence choke speech or
does it not.

Lying in a conundrum, lying so makes the springs restless, lying so is a
reduction, not lying so is arrangeable.

Releasing the oldest auction that is the pleasing some still renewing.

Giving it away, not giving it away, is there any difference. Giving it
away. Not giving it away.

Almost very likely there is no seduction, almost very likely there is no
stream, certainly very likely the height is penetrated, certainly
certainly the target is cleaned. Come to sit, come to refuse, come to
surround, come slowly and age is not lessening. The time which showed
that was when there was no eclipse. All the time that resenting was
removal all that time there was breadth. No breath is shadowed, no
breath is paintaking and yet certainly what could be the use of paper,
paper shows no disorder, it shows no desertion.

Why is there a difference between one window and another, why is there
a difference, because the curtain is shorter. There is no distaste in
beefsteak or in plums or in gallons of milk water, there is no defiance
in original piling up over a roof, there is no daylight in the evening,
there is none there empty.

A tribune, a tribune does not mean paper, it means nothing more than
cake, it means more sugar, it shows the state of lengthening any nose.
The last spice is that which shows the whole evening spent in that
sleep, it shows so that walking is an alleviation, and yet this
astonishes everybody the distance is so sprightly. In all the time there
are three days, those are not passed uselessly. Any little thing is a
change that is if nothing is wasted in that cellar. All the rest of the
chairs are established.

A success, a success is alright when there are there rooms and no
vacancies, a success is alright when there is a package, success is
alright anyway and any curtain is wholesale. A curtain diminishes and an
ample space shows varnish.

One taste one tack, one taste one bottle, one taste one fish, one taste
one barometer. This shows no distinguishing sign when there is a store.

Any smile is stern and any coat is a sample. Is there any use in
changing more doors than there are committees. This question is so often
asked that squares show that they are blotters. It is so very agreeable
to hear a voice and to see all the signs of that expression.

Cadences, real cadences, real cadences and a quiet color. Careful and
curved, cake and sober, all accounts and mixture, a guess at anything is
righteous, should there be a call there would be a voice.

A line in life, a single line and a stairway, a rigid cook, no cook and
no equator, all the same there is higher than that another evasion. Did
that mean shame, it meant memory. Looking into a place that was hanging
and was visible looking into this place and seeing a chair did that mean
relief, it did, it certainly did not cause constipation and yet there is
a melody that has white for a tune when there is straw color. This shows
no face.

Star-light, what is star-light, star-light is a little light that is not
always mentioned with the sun, it is mentioned with the moon and the
sun, it is mixed up with the rest of the time.

Why is the name changed The name is changed because in the little space
there is a tree, in some space there are no trees, in every space there
is a hint of more, all this causes the decision.

Why is there education, there is education because the two tables which
are folding are not tied together with a ribbon, string is used and
string being used there is a necessity for another one and another one
not being used to hearing shows no ordinary use of any evening and yet
there is no disgrace in looking, none at all. This came to separate when
there was simple selection of an entire preoccupation.

A curtain, a curtain which is fastened discloses mourning, this does not
mean sparrows or elocution or even a whole preparation, it means that
there are ears and very often much more altogether.

Climate, climate is not southern, a little glass, a bright winter, a
strange supper an elastic tumbler, all this shows that the back is
furnished and red which is red is a dark color. An example of this is
fifteen years and a separation of regret.

China is not down when there are plates, lights are not ponderous and
incalculable.

Currents, currents are not in the air and on the floor and in the door
and behind it first. Currents do not show it plainer. This which is
mastered has so thin a space to build it all that there is plenty of
room and yet is it quarreling, it is not and the insistence is marked. A
change is in a current and there is no habitable exercise.

A religion, almost a religion, any religion, a quintal in religion, a
relying and a surface and a service in indecision and a creature and a
question and a syllable in answer and more counting and no quarrel and a
single scientific statement and no darkness and no question and an
earned administration and a single set of sisters and an outline and no
blisters and the section seeing yellow and the centre having spelling
and no solitude and no quaintness and yet solid quite so solid and the
single surface centred and the question in the placard and the
singularity, is there a singularity, and the singularity, why is there a
question and the singularity why is the surface outrageous, why is it
beautiful why is it not when there is no doubt, why is anything vacant,
why is not disturbing a centre no virtue, why is it when it is and why
is it when it is and there is no doubt, there is no doubt that the
singularity shows.

A climate, a single climate, all the time there is a single climate, any
time there is a doubt, any time there is music that is to question more
and more and there is no politeness, there is hardly any ordeal and
certainly there is no tablecloth.

This is a sound and obligingness more obligingness leads to a harmony
in hesitation.

A lake a single lake which is a pond and a little water any water which
is an ant and no burning, not any burning, all this is sudden.

A canister that is the remains of furniture and a looking-glass and a
bed-room and a larger size, all the stand is shouted and what is ancient
is practical. Should the resemblance be so that any little cover is
copied, should it be so that yards are measured, should it be so and
there be a sin, should it be so then certainly a room is big enough when
it is so empty and the corners are gathered together.

The change is mercenary that settles whitening the coloring and serving
dishes where there is metal and making yellow any yellow every color in
a shade which is expressed in a tray. This is a monster and awkward
quite awkward and the little design which is flowered which is not
strange and yet has visible writing, this is not shown all the time but
at once, after that it rests where it is and where it is in place. No
change is not needed. That does show design.

Excellent, more excellence is borrowing and slanting very slanting is
light and secret and a recitation and emigration. Certainly shoals are
shallow and nonsense more nonsense is sullen. Very little cake is water,
very little cake has that escape.

Sugar any sugar, anger every anger, lover sermon lover, centre no
distractor, all order is in a measure.

Left over to be a lamp light, left over in victory, left over in saving,
all this and negligence and bent wood and more even much more is not so
exact as a pen and a turtle and even, certainly, and even a piece of the
same experience as more.

To consider a lecture, to consider it well is so anxious and so much a
charity and really supposing there is grain and if a stubble every
stubble is urgent, will there not be a chance of legality. The sound is
sickened and the price is purchased and golden what is golden, a
clergyman, a single tax, a currency and an inner chamber.

Checking an emigration, checking it by smiling and certainly by the same
satisfactory stretch of hands that have more use for it than nothing,
and mildly not mildly a correction, not mildly even a circumstance and a
sweetness and a serenity. Powder, that has no color, if it did have
would it be white.

A whole soldier any whole soldier has no more detail than any case of
measles.

A bridge a very small bridge in a location and thunder, any thunder,
this is the capture of reversible sizing and more indeed more can be
cautious. This which makes monotony careless makes it likely that there
is an exchange in principle and more than that, change in organization.

This cloud does change with the movements of the moon and the narrow the
quite narrow suggestion of the building. It does and then when it is
settled and no sounds differ then comes the moment when cheerfulness is
so assured that there is an occasion.

A plain lap, any plain lap shows that sign, it shows that there is not
so much extension as there would be if there were more choice in
everything. And why complain of more, why complain of very much more.
Why complain at all when it is all arranged that as there is no more
opportunity and no more appeal and not even any more clinching that
certainly now some time has come.

A window has another spelling, it has "f" all together, it lacks no more
then and this is rain, this may even be something else, at any rate
there is no dedication in splendor. There is a turn of the stranger.

Catholic to be turned is to venture on youth and a section of debate, it
even means that no class where each one over fifty is regular is so
stationary that there are invitations.

A curving example makes righteous finger-nails. This is the only object
in secretion and speech.

To being the same four are no more than were taller. The rest had a big
chair and a surveyance a cold accumulation of nausea, and even more than
that, they had a disappointment.

Nothing aiming is a flower, if flowers are abundant then they are lilac,
if they are not they are white in the centre.

Dance a clean dream and an extravagant turn up, secure the steady rights
and translate more than translate the authority, show the choice and
make no more mistakes than yesterday.

This means clearness, it means a regular notion of exercise, it means
more than that, it means liking counting, it means more than that, it
does not mean exchanging a line.

Why is there more craving than there is in a mountain. This does not
seem strange to one, it does not seem strange to an echo and more surely
is in there not being a habit. Why is there so much useless suffering.
Why is there.

Any wet weather means an open window, what is attaching eating, anything
that is violent and cooking and shows weather is the same in the end and
why is there more use in something than in all that.

The cases are made and books, back books are used to secure tears and
church. They are even used to exchange black slippers. They can not be
mended with wax. They show no need of any such occasion.

A willow and no window, a wide place stranger, a wideness makes an
active center.

The sight of no pussy cat is so different that a tobacco zone is white
and cream.

A lilac, all a lilac and no mention of butter, not even bread and
butter, no butter and no occasion, not even a silent resemblance, not
more care than just enough haughty.

A safe weight is that which when it pleases is hanging. A safer weight
is one more naughty in a spectacle. The best game is that which is shiny
and scratching. Please a pease and a cracker and a wretched use of
summer.

Surprise, the only surprise has no occasion. It is an ingredient and the
section the whole section is one season.

A pecking which is petting and no worse than in the same morning is not
the only way to be continuous often.

A light in the moon the only light is on Sunday. What was the sensible
decision. The sensible decision was that notwithstanding many
declarations and more music, not even notwithstanding the choice and a
torch and a collection, notwithstanding the celebrating hat and a
vacation and even more noise than cutting, notwithstanding Europe and
Asia and being overbearing, not even notwithstanding an elephant and a
strict occasion, not even withstanding more cultivation and some
seasoning, not even with drowning and with the ocean being encircling,
not even with more likeness and any cloud, not even with terrific
sacrifice of pedestrianism and a special resolution, not even more
likely to be pleasing. The care with which the rain is wrong and the
green is wrong and the white is wrong, the care with which there is a
chair and plenty of breathing. The care with which there is incredible
justice and likeness, all this makes a magnificent asparagus, and also a
fountain.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Tender Buttons, by Gertrude Stein

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TENDER BUTTONS ***

***** This file should be named 15396-8.txt or 15396-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/5/3/9/15396/

Produced by Suzanne Shell, Josephine Paolucci and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg EBook of Three Soldiers, by John Dos Passos

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**eBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These eBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****


Title: Three Soldiers

Author: John Dos Passos

Release Date: August, 2004 [EBook #6362]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on December 1, 2002]

Edition: 10

Language: English


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THREE SOLDIERS ***




Etext transcribed by Eve Sobol, South Bend, IN, USA





THREE SOLDIERS

JOHN DOS PASSOS

1921



CONTENTS

PART ONE: MAKING THE MOULD

PART TWO: THE METAL COOLS

PART THREE: MACHINES

PART FOUR: RUST

PART FIVE: THE WORLD OUTSIDE

PART SIX: UNDER THE WHEELS


"Les contemporains qui souffrent de certaines choses ne peuvent
s'en souvenir qu'avec une horreur qui paralyse tout autre plaisir,
meme celui de lire un conte."

                                          STENDHAL


                  PART ONE: MAKING THE MOULD

                                I

The company stood at attention, each man looking straight before
him at the empty parade ground, where the cinder piles showed
purple with evening. On the wind that smelt of barracks and
disinfectant there was a faint greasiness of food cooking. At the
other side of the wide field long lines of men shuffled slowly
into the narrow wooden shanty that was the mess hall. Chins down,
chests out, legs twitching and tired from the afternoon's
drilling, the company stood at attention. Each man stared straight
in front of him, some vacantly with resignation, some trying to
amuse themselves by noting minutely every object in their field of
vision,--the cinder piles, the long shadows of the barracks and
mess halls where they could see men standing about, spitting,
smoking, leaning against clapboard walls. Some of the men in line
could hear their watches ticking in their pockets.

Someone moved, his feet making a crunching noise in the cinders.

The sergeant's voice snarled out: "You men are at attention. Quit
yer wrigglin' there, you!"

The men nearest the offender looked at him out of the corners of
their eyes.

Two officers, far out on the parade ground, were coming towards
them. By their gestures and the way they walked, the men at
attention could see that they were chatting about something that
amused them. One of the officers laughed boyishly, turned away and
walked slowly back across the parade ground. The other, who was
the lieutenant, came towards them smiling. As he approached his
company, the smile left his lips and he advanced his chin, walking
with heavy precise steps.

"Sergeant, you may dismiss the company." The lieutenant's voice
was pitched in a hard staccato.

The sergeant's hand snapped up to salute like a block signal.
"Companee dis...missed," he rang out.

The row of men in khaki became a crowd of various individuals with
dusty boots and dusty faces. Ten minutes later they lined up and
marched in a column of fours to mess. A few red filaments of
electric lights gave a dusty glow in the brownish obscurity where
the long tables and benches and the board floors had a faint smell
of garbage mingled with the smell of the disinfectant the tables
had been washed off with after the last meal. The men, holding
their oval mess kits in front of them, filed by the great tin
buckets at the door, out of which meat and potatoes were splashed
into each plate by a sweating K.P. in blue denims.

"Don't look so bad tonight," said Fuselli to the man opposite him
as he hitched his sleeves up at the wrists and leaned over his
steaming food. He was sturdy, with curly hair and full vigorous
lips that he smacked hungrily as he ate.

"It ain't," said the pink flaxen-haired youth opposite him, who
wore his broad-brimmed hat on the side of his head with a certain
jauntiness:

"I got a pass tonight," said Fuselli, tilting his head vainly.

"Goin' to tear things up?"

"Man...I got a girl at home back in Frisco. She's a good kid."

"Yer right not to go with any of the girls in this goddam town....
They ain't clean, none of 'em.... That is if ye want to go
overseas."

The flaxen-haired youth leaned across the table earnestly.

"I'm goin' to git some more chow: Wait for me, will yer?" said
Fuselli.

"What yer going to do down town?" asked the flaxen-haired youth
when Fuselli came back.

"Dunno,--run round a bit an' go to the movies," he answered,
filling his mouth with potato.

"Gawd, it's time fer retreat." They overheard a voice behind them.

Fuselli  stuffed his mouth as full as he could and emptied the
rest of his meal reluctantly into the garbage pail.

A few moments later he stood stiffly at attention in a khaki row
that was one of hundreds of other khaki rows, identical, that
filled all sides of the parade ground, while the bugle blew
somewhere at the other end where the flag-pole was. Somehow it
made him think of the man behind the desk in the office of the
draft board who had said, handing him the papers sending him to
camp, "I wish I was going with you," and had held out a white bony
hand that Fuselli, after a moment's hesitation, had taken in his
own stubby brown hand. The man had added  fervently, "It must be
grand, just grand, to feel the danger, the chance of being potted
any minute. Good luck, young feller.... Good luck." Fuselli
remembered unpleasantly his paper-white face and the greenish look
of his bald head; but the words had made him stride out of the
office sticking out his chest, brushing truculently past a
group of men in the door. Even now the memory of it, mixing with
the strains of the national anthem made him feel important,
truculent.

"Squads right!" same an order. Crunch, crunch, crunch in the
gravel. The companies were going back to their barracks. He wanted
to smile but he didn't dare. He wanted to smile because he had a
pass till midnight, because in ten minutes he'd be outside the
gates, outside the green fence and the sentries and the strands of
barbed wire. Crunch, crunch, crunch; oh, they were so slow in
getting back to the barracks and he was losing time, precious free
minutes. "Hep, hep, hep," cried the sergeant, glaring down the
ranks, with his aggressive bulldog expression, to where someone had
fallen out of step.

The company stood at attention in the dusk. Fuselli was biting the
inside of  his lips with impatience. Minutes at last, as if
reluctantly, the sergeant sang out:

"Dis...missed."

Fuselli hurried towards the gate, brandishing his pass with an
important swagger.

Once out on the asphalt of the street, he looked down the long row
of lawns and porches where violet arc lamps already contested the
faint afterglow, drooping from their iron stalks far above the
recently planted saplings of the avenue. He stood at the corner
slouched against a telegraph pole, with the camp fence, surmounted
by three strands of barbed wire, behind him, wondering which way he
would go. This was a hell of a town anyway. And he used to think he
wanted to travel round and see places.--"Home'll be good enough for
me after this," he muttered. Walking down the long street towards
the centre of town, where was the moving-picture show, he thought of
his home, of the dark apartment on the ground floor of a seven-
storey house where his aunt lived. "Gee, she used to cook swell," he
murmured regretfully.

On a warm evening like this he would have stood round at the
corner where the drugstore was, talking to fellows he knew,
giggling when the girls who lived in the street, walking arm and
arm, twined in couples or trios, passed by affecting ignorance of
the glances that followed them. Or perhaps he would have gone
walking with Al, who worked in the same optical-goods store, down
through the glaring streets of the theatre and restaurant quarter,
or along the wharves and ferry slips, where they would have sat
smoking and looking out over the dark purple harbor, with its
winking lights and its moving ferries spilling swaying reflections
in the water out of their square reddish-glowing windows. If they
had been lucky, they would have seen a liner come in through the
Golden Gate, growing from a blur of light to a huge moving
brilliance, like the front of a high-class theatre, that towered
above the ferry boats. You could often hear the thump of the screw
and the swish of the bow cutting the calm baywater, and the sound
of a band playing, that came alternately faint and loud. "When I
git rich," Fuselli had liked to say to Al, "I'm going to take a
trip on one of them liners."

"Yer dad come over from the old country in one, didn't he?" Al
would ask.

"Oh, he came steerage. I'd stay at home if I had to do that. Man,
first class for me, a cabin de lux, when I git rich."

But here he was in this town in the East, where he didn't know
anybody and where there was no place to go but the movies.

"'Lo, buddy," came a voice beside him. The tall youth who had sat
opposite at mess was just catching up to him. "Goin' to the
movies?"

"Yare, nauthin' else to do."

"Here's a rookie. Just got to camp this mornin'," said the tall
youth, jerking his head in the direction of the man beside him.

"You'll like it. Ain't so bad as it seems at first," said Fuselli
encouragingly.

"I was just telling him," said the other, "to be careful
as hell not to get in wrong. If ye once get in wrong in this
damn army...it's hell."

"You bet yer life...so they sent ye over to our company, did they,
rookie? Ain't so bad. The sergeant's sort o' decent if yo're in
right with him, but the lieutenant's a stinker.... Where you
from?"

"New York," said the rookie, a little man of thirty with an ash-
colored face and a shiny Jewish nose. "I'm in the clothing
business there. I oughtn't to be drafted at all. It's an outrage.
I'm consumptive." He spluttered in a feeble squeaky voice.

"They'll fix ye up, don't you fear," said the tall youth.
"They'll make you so goddam well ye won't know yerself. Yer mother
won't know ye, when you get home, rookie.... But you're in
luck."

"Why?"

"Bein' from New York. The corporal, Tim Sidis, is from New York,
an' all the New York fellers in the company got a graft with
him."

"What kind of cigarettes d'ye smoke?" asked the tall youth.

"I don't smoke."

"Ye'd better learn. The corporal likes fancy ciggies and so does
the sergeant; you jus' slip 'em each a butt now and then. May
help ye to get in right with "em."

"Don't do no good," said Fuselli.... "It's juss luck. But keep
neat-like and smilin' and you'll get on all right. And if they
start to ride ye, show fight. Ye've got to be hard boiled to
git on in this army."

"Ye're goddam right," said the tall youth. "Don't let 'em ride
yer.... What's yer name, rookie?"

"Eisenstein."

"This feller's name's Powers.... Bill Powers. Mine's Fuselli....
Goin' to the movies, Mr. Eisenstein?"

"No, I'm trying to find a skirt." The little man leered wanly.
"Glad to have got ackwainted."

"Goddam kike!" said Powers as Eisenstein walked off up a side
street, planted, like the avenue, with saplings on which the
sickly leaves rustled in the faint breeze that smelt of factories and
coal dust.

"Kikes ain't so bad," said Fuselli, "I got a good friend who's a
kike."



They were coming out of the movies in a stream of people in which
the blackish clothes of factory-hands predominated.

"I came near bawlin' at the picture of the feller leavin' his girl
to go off to the war," said Fuselli.

"Did yer?"

"It was just like it was with me. Ever been in Frisco, Powers?"

The tall youth shook his head. Then he took off his broad-brimmed
hat and ran his fingers over his stubby tow-head.

"Gee, it was some hot in there," he muttered.

"Well, it's like this," said Fuselli. "You have to cross the ferry
to Oakland. My aunt...ye know I ain't got any mother, so I always
live at my aunt's.... My aunt an' her sister-in-law an' Mabe...
Mabe's my girl...they all came over on the ferry-boat, 'spite of
my tellin' 'em I didn't want 'em. An' Mabe said she was mad at me,
'cause she'd seen the letter I wrote Georgine Slater. She was a
toughie, lived in our street, I used to write mash notes to. An' I
kep' tellin' Mabe I'd done it juss for the hell of it, an' that I
didn't mean nawthin' by it. An' Mabe said she wouldn't never
forgive me, an' then I said maybe I'd be killed an' she'd never
see me again, an' then we all began to bawl. Gawd! it was a
mess.... "

"It's hell sayin' good-by to girls," said Powers, understandingly.
"Cuts a feller all up. I guess it's better to go with coosies. Ye
don't have to say good-by to them."

"Ever gone with a coosie?"

"Not exactly," admitted the tall youth, blushing all over his pink
face, so that it was noticeable even under the ashen  glare  of
the arc lights on the avenue that led towards camp.

"I have," said Fuselli, with a certain pride. "I used to go with
a Portugee girl. My but she was a toughie. I've given all that
up now I'm engaged, though.... But I was tellin' ye.... Well, we
finally made up an' I kissed her an' Mabe said she'd never marry
any one but me. So when we was walkin" up the street I spied a
silk service flag in a winder, that was all fancy with a star all
trimmed up to beat the band, an' I said to myself, I'm goin' to
give that to Mabe, an' I ran in an' bought it. I didn't give a
hoot in hell what it cost. So when we was all kissin' and
bawlin' when I was goin' to leave them to report to the overseas
detachment, I shoved it into her hand, an' said, 'Keep that,
girl, an' don't you forgit me.' An' what did she do but pull out
a five-pound box o' candy from behind her back an' say, 'Don't
make yerself  sick, Dan.'  An' she'd had it all the time without
my knowin' it. Ain't girls clever?"

"Yare," said the tall youth vaguely.



Along the rows of cots, when Fuselli got back to the barracks,
men were talking excitedly.

"There's hell to pay, somebody's broke out of the jug."

"How?"

"Damned if I know."

"Sergeant Timmons said he made a rope of his blankets."

"No, the feller on guard helped him to get away."

"Like hell he did. It was like this. I was walking by the
guardhouse when they found out about it."

"What company did he belong ter?"

"Dunno."

"What's his name?"


"Some guy on trial for insubordination. Punched an officer in the
jaw."

"I'd a liked to have seen that."

"Anyhow he's fixed himself this time."

"You're goddam right."

"Will you fellers quit talkin'? It's after taps," thundered the
sergeant, who sat reading the paper at a little board desk at the
door of the barracks under the feeble light of one small bulb,
carefully screened. "You'll have the O. D. down on us."

Fuselli wrapped the blanket round his head and prepared to sleep.
Snuggled down into the blankets on the narrow cot, he felt
sheltered from the sergeant's thundering voice and from the cold
glare of officers' eyes. He felt cosy and happy like he had felt
in bed at home, when he had been a little kid. For a moment he
pictured to himself the other man, the man who had punched an
officer's jaw, dressed like he was, maybe only nineteen, the same
age like he was, with a girl like Mabe waiting for him somewhere.
How cold and frightful it must feel to be out of the camp with the
guard looking for you! He pictured himself running breathless down
a long street pursued by a company with guns, by officers whose
eyes glinted cruelly like the pointed tips of bullets. He pulled
the blanket closer round his head, enjoying the warmth and
softness of the wool against his cheek. He must remember to smile
at the sergeant when he passed him off duty. Somebody had said
there'd be promotions soon. Oh, he wanted so hard to be promoted.
It'd be so swell if he could write back to Mabe and tell her to
address her letters Corporal Dan Fuselli. He must be more careful
not to do anything that would get him in wrong with anybody. He
must never miss an opportunity to show them what a clever kid he
was. "Oh, when we're ordered overseas, I'll show them," he thought
ardently, and picturing to himself long movie reels of heroism he
went off to sleep.

 A sharp voice beside his cot woke him with a jerk.

"Get up, you."

The white beam of a pocket searchlight was glaring in the face of
the man next to him.

"The O. D." said Fuselli to himself.

"Get up, you," came the sharp voice again.

The man in the next cot stirred and opened his eyes.

"Get up."

"Here, sir," muttered the man in the next cot, his eyes blinking
sleepily in the glare of the flashlight. He got out of bed and
stood unsteadily at attention.

"Don't you know better than to sleep in your O. D. shirt? Take
it off."

"Yes, sir."

"What's your name?"

The man looked up, blinking, too dazed to speak. "Don't know your
own name, eh?" said the officer, glaring at the man savagely,
using his curt voice like a whip.--"Quick, take off yer shirt and
pants and get back to bed."

The Officer of the Day moved on, flashing his light to one side
and the other in his midnight inspection of the barracks.
Intense blackness again, and the sound of men breathing deeply in
sleep, of men snoring. As he went to sleep Fuselli could hear the
man beside him swearing, monotonously, in an even whisper,
pausing now and then to think of  new  filth, of  new
combinations of  words, swearing away his helpless anger,
soothing himself to sleep by the monotonous reiteration of his
swearing.

A little later Fuselli woke with a choked nightmare cry. He had
dreamed that he had smashed the O. D. in the jaw and had broken
out of the jug and was running, breathless, stumbling, falling,
while the company on guard chased him down an avenue lined with
little dried-up saplings, gaining on him, while with voices
metallic as the clicking of rifle triggers officers shouted
orders, so that he was certain to be caught, certain to be shot.
He shook himself all over, shaking off the nightmare as a dog
shakes off water, and went back to sleep again, snuggling into
his blankets.



                             II

John Andrews stood naked in the center of a large bare room, of
which the walls and ceiling and floor were made of raw pine
boards. The air was heavy from the steam heat. At a desk in one
corner a typewriter clicked spasmodically.

"Say, young feller, d'you  know how to spell imbecility?"

John Andrews walked over to the desk, told him, and added, "Are
you going to examine me?"

The man went on typewriting without answering. John Andrews stood
in the center of the floor with his arms folded, half amused, half
angry, shifting his weight from one foot to the other, listening
to the sound of the typewriter and of the man's voice as he read
out each word of the report he was copying.

"Recommendation for discharge"...click, click..."Damn  this
typewriter.... Private Coe  Elbert"...click, click. "Damn these
rotten army typewriters.... Reason...mental deficiency. History of
Case.... " At that moment the recruiting sergeant came back. "Look
here, if  you don't have that recommendation ready in ten minutes
Captain Arthurs'll be mad as hell about it, Hill. For God's sake
get it done. He said already that if you couldn't do the work, to
get somebody who could. You don't want to lose your job do you?"

"Hullo," the sergeant's eyes lit on John Andrews, "I'd forgotten
you. Run around the room a little.... No, not that way. Just a
little so I can test yer heart.... God, these rookies are thick."

While he stood tamely being prodded and measured, feeling like a
prize horse at a fair, John Andrews listened to the man at the
typewriter, whose voice went on monotonously. "No...record of
sexual dep.... O hell, this eraser's no good!... pravity or
alcoholism; spent...normal...youth on farm. App-ear-ance normal
though im...say, how many 'm's' in immature?"

"All right, put yer clothes on," said the recruiting sergeant.
"Quick, I can't spend all day. Why the hell did they send you down
here alone?"

"The papers were balled up," said Andrews.

"Scores ten years...in test B," went on the voice of the man at the
typewriter. "Sen...exal ment...m-e-n-t-a-l-i-t-y that of child of
eight. Seems unable...to either.... Goddam this man's writin'. How
kin I copy it when he don't write out his words?"

"All right. I guess you'll do. Now there are some forms to fill
out. Come over here."

Andrews followed the recruiting sergeant to a desk in the far
corner of the room, from which he could hear more faintly the
click, click of the typewriter and the man's voice mumbling
angrily.

"Forgets to obey orders.... Responds to no form of per...suasion.
M-e-m-o-r-y, nil."

"All right. Take this to barracks B.... Fourth building, to the
right; shake a leg," said the recruiting sergeant.

Andrews drew a deep breath of the sparkling air outside. He stood
irresolutely a moment on the wooden steps of the building looking
down the row of hastily constructed barracks. Some were painted
green, some were of plain boards, and some were still mere
skeletons. Above his head great piled, rose-tinted  clouds  were
moving slowly across the immeasurable free sky. His glance slid
down the sky to some tall trees that flamed bright yellow with
autumn outside the camp limits, and then to the end of the long
street of barracks, where was a picket fence and a sentry walking
to and fro, to and fro. His brows contracted for a moment. Then he
walked with a sort of swagger towards the fourth building to the
right.



John Andrews was washing windows. He stood in dirty blue denims at
the top of a ladder, smearing with a soapy cloth the small panes
of the barrack windows. His nostrils were full of a smell of dust
and of the sandy quality of the soap. A little man with one lined
greyish-red cheek puffed out by tobacco followed him up also on a
ladder, polishing the panes with a dry cloth till they shone and
reflected the mottled cloudy sky. Andrews's legs were tired from
climbing up and down the ladder, his hands were sore from the
grittiness of the soap; as he worked he looked down, without
thinking, on rows of cots where the blankets were all folded the
same way, on some of which men were sprawled in attitudes of utter
relaxation. He kept remarking to himself how strange it was that
he was not thinking of anything. In the last few days his mind
seemed to have become a hard meaningless core.

"How long do we have to do this?" he asked the man who was working
with him. The man went on chewing, so that Andrews thought he was
not going to answer at all. He was just beginning to speak again
when the man, balancing thoughtfully on top of his ladder, drawled
out:

"Four o'clock."

"We won't finish today then?"

The man shook his head and wrinkled his face into a strange spasm
as he spat.

"Been here long?"

"Not so long."

"How long?"

"Three months.... Ain't so long." The man spat again, and climbing
down from his ladder waited, leaning against the wall, until
Andrews should finish soaping his window.

"I'll go crazy if I stay here three months.... I've been here a
week," muttered Andrews between his teeth as he climbed down and
moved his ladder to the next window.

They both climbed their ladders again in silence.

"How's it you're in Casuals?" asked Andrews again.

"Ain't got no lungs."

"Why don't they discharge you?"

"Reckon they're going to, soon."

They worked on in silence for a long time. Andrews stared at the
upper right-hand corner and smeared with soap each pane of the
window in turn. Then he climbed down, moved his ladder, and
started on the next window. At times he would start in the middle
of the window for variety. As he worked a rhythm began pushing its
way through the hard core of his mind, leavening it, making it
fluid. It expressed the vast dusty dullness, the men waiting in
rows on drill fields, standing at attention, the monotony of feet
tramping in unison, of the dust rising from the battalions going
back and forth over the dusty drill fields. He felt the rhythm
filling his whole body, from his sore hands to his legs, tired
from marching back and forth from making themselves the same
length as millions of other legs. His mind began unconsciously,
from habit, working on it, orchestrating it. He could imagine a
vast orchestra swaying with it. His heart was beating faster. He
must make it into music; he must fix it in himself, so that he
could make it into music and write it down, so that orchestras
could play it and make the ears of multitudes feel it, make their
flesh tingle with it.

He went on working through the endless afternoon, climbing up and
down his ladder, smearing the barrack windows with a soapy rag. A
silly phrase took the place of the welling of music in his mind:
"Arbeit und Rhythmus." He kept saying it over and over to himself:
"Arbeit und Rhythmus." He tried to drive the phrase out of his
mind, to bury his mind in the music of the rhythm that had come to
him, that expressed the dusty boredom, the harsh constriction of
warm bodies full of gestures and attitudes and aspirations into
moulds, like the moulds toy soldiers are cast in. The phrase
became someone shouting  raucously in his ears: "Arbeit und
Rhythmus,"--drowning everything else, beating his mind hard again,
parching it.

But suddenly he laughed aloud. Why, it was in German. He was being
got ready to kill men who said that. If anyone said that, he was
going to kill him. They were going to kill everybody who spoke
that language, he and all the men whose feet he could hear
tramping on the drill field, whose legs were all being made the
same length on the drill field.



                             III

It was Saturday morning. Directed by the corporal, a bandy-legged
Italian who even on the army diet managed to keep a faint odour of
garlic about him, three soldiers in blue denims were sweeping up
the leaves in the street between the rows of barracks.

"You fellers are slow as molasses.... Inspection in twenty-five
minutes," he kept saying.

The soldiers raked on doggedly, paying no attention. "You don't
give a damn. If we don't pass inspection, I get hell--not you.
Please queeck. Here, you, pick up all those goddam cigarette
butts."

Andrews made a grimace and began collecting the little grey sordid
ends of burnt-out cigarettes. As he leant over he found himself
looking into the dark-brown eyes of the soldier who was working
beside him. The eyes were contracted with anger and there was a
flush under the tan of the boyish face.

"Ah didn't git in this here army to be ordered around by a goddam
wop," he muttered.

"Doesn't matter much who you're ordered around by, you're ordered
around just the same," said Andrews. "Where d'ye come from,
buddy?"

"Oh, I come from New York. My folks are from Virginia," said
Andrews.

"Indiana's ma state. The tornado country.... Git to work; here's
that bastard wop comin' around the buildin'."

"Don't pick 'em up that-a-way; sweep 'em up," shouted the corporal.

Andrews and the Indiana boy went round with a broom and a shovel
collecting chewed-out quids of tobacco and cigar butts and stained
bits of paper.

"What's your name? Mahn's Chrisfield. Folks all call me Chris."

"Mine's Andrews, John Andrews."

"Ma dad uster have a hired man named Andy. Took sick an' died last
summer. How long d'ye reckon it'll be before us-guys git
overseas?"

"God, I don't know."

"Ah want to see that country over there."

"You do?"

"Don't you?"

"You bet I do."

"All right, what you fellers stand here for? Go and dump them
garbage cans. Lively!" shouted the corporal waddling about
importantly on his bandy legs. He kept looking down the row of
barracks, muttering to himself, "Goddam.... Time fur inspectin'
now, goddam. Won't never pass this time."

His face froze suddenly into obsequious immobility. He brought his
hand up to the brim of his hat. A group of officers strode past
him into the nearest building.

John Andrews, coming back from emptying the garbage pails, went in
the back door of his barracks.

"Attention!" came the cry from the other end. He made his neck and
arms as rigid as possible.

Through the silent barracks came the hard clank of the heels of
the officers inspecting.

A sallow face with hollow eyes and heavy square jaw came close to
Andrews's eyes. He stared straight before him noting the few
reddish hairs on the officer's Adam's apple and the new insignia
on either side of his collar.

"Sergeant, who is this man?" came a voice from the sallow face.

"Don't know, sir; a new recruit, sir. Corporal Valori, who is this
man?"

"The name's Andrews, sergeant," said the Italian corporal with an
obsequious whine in his voice.

The officer addressed Andrews directly, speaking fast and loud.
"How long have you been in the army?"

"One week, sir."

"Don't you know you have to be clean and shaved and ready for
inspection every Saturday morning at nine?"

"I was cleaning the barracks, sir."

"To teach you not to answer back when an officer addresses
you...." The officer spaced his words carefully, lingering on them.
As he spoke he glanced out of the corner of his eye at his
superior and noticed the major was frowning. His tone changed ever
so slightly. "If this ever occurs again you may be sure that
disciplinary action will be taken.... Attention there!" At the
other end of the barracks a man had moved. Again, amid absolute
silence, could be heard the clanking of the officers' heels as the
inspection continued.


"Now, fellows, all together," cried the "Y" man who stood with his
arms stretched wide in front of the movie screen. The piano
started jingling and the roomful of crowded soldiers roared out:

"Hail, Hail, the gang's all here;
 We're going to get the Kaiser,
 We're going to get the Kaiser,
 We're going to get the Kaiser,
 Now!"

The rafters rang with their deep voices.

The "Y" man twisted his lean face into a facetious expression.

"Somebody tried to put one over on the 'Y' man and sing 'What the
hell do we care?' But you do care, don't you, Buddy?" he shouted.

There was a little rattle of laughter.

"Now, once more," said the "Y" man again, "and lots of guts in the
get and lots of kill in the Kaiser. Now all together.... "

The moving pictures had begun. John Andrews looked furtively about
him, at the face of the Indiana boy beside him intent on the
screen, at the tanned faces and the close-cropped heads that rose
above the mass of khaki-covered bodies about him. Here and there a
pair of eyes glinted in the white flickering light from the
screen. Waves of laughter or of little exclamations passed over
them. They were all so alike, they seemed at moments to be but one
organism. This was what he had sought when he had enlisted, he
said to himself. It was in this that he would take refuge from the
horror of the world that had fallen upon him. He was sick of
revolt, of thought, of carrying his individuality like a banner
above the turmoil. This was much better, to let everything go, to
stamp out his maddening desire for music, to humble himself into
the mud of common slavery. He was still tingling with sudden anger
from the officer's voice that morning: "Sergeant, who is this
man?" The officer had stared in his face, as a man might stare at
a piece of furniture.

"Ain't this some film?" Chrisfield turned to him with a smile that
drove his anger away in a pleasant feeling of comradeship.

"The part that's comin's fine. I seen it before out in Frisco,"
said the man on the other side of Andrews. "Gee, it makes ye hate
the Huns."

The man at the piano jingled elaborately in the intermission
between the two parts of the movie.

The Indiana boy leaned in front of John Andrews, putting an arm
round his shoulders, and talked to the other man.

"You from Frisco?"

"Yare."

"That's goddam funny. You're from the Coast, this feller's from
New York, an' Ah'm from ole Indiana, right in the middle."

"What company you in?"

"Ah ain't yet. This feller an me's in Casuals."

"That's a hell of a place.... Say, my name's Fuselli."

"Mahn's Chrisfield."

"Mine's Andrews."

"How soon's it take a feller to git out o' this camp?"

"Dunno. Some guys says three weeks and some says six months....
Say, mebbe you'll get into our company. They transferred a lot of
men out the other day, an' the corporal says they're going to give
us rookies instead."

"Goddam it, though, but Ah want to git overseas."

"It's swell over there," said Fuselli, "everything's awful pretty-
like. Picturesque, they call it. And the people wears peasant
costumes.... I had an uncle who used to tell me about it. He came
from near Torino."

"Where's that?"

"I dunno. He's an Eyetalian."

"Say, how long does it take to git overseas?"

"Oh, a week or two," said Andrews.

"As long as that?" But the movie had begun again, unfolding scenes
of soldiers in spiked helmets marching into Belgian cities full of
little milk carts drawn by dogs and old women in peasant costume.
There were hisses and catcalls when a German flag was seen, and as
the troops were pictured advancing, bayonetting the civilians in
wide Dutch pants, the old women with starched caps, the soldiers
packed into the stuffy Y. M. C. A. hut shouted oaths at them.
Andrews felt blind hatred stirring like something that had a life
of its own in the young men about him. He was lost in it, carried
away in it, as in a stampede of wild cattle. The terror of it was
like ferocious hands clutching his throat. He glanced at the faces
round him. They were all intent and flushed, glinting with sweat
in the heat of the room.

As he was leaving the hut, pressed in a tight stream of soldiers
moving towards the door, Andrews heard a man say:

"I never raped a woman in my life, but by God, I'm going to. I'd
give a lot to rape some of those goddam German women."

"I hate 'em too," came another voice, "men, women, children and
unborn children. They're either jackasses or full of the lust for
power like their rulers are, to let themselves be governed by a
bunch of warlords like that."

"Ah'd lahk te cepture a German officer an' make him shine ma boots
an' then shoot him dead," said Chris to Andrews as they walked
down the long row towards their barracks.

"You would?"

"But Ah'd a damn side rather shoot somebody else Ah know," went on
Chris intensely. "Don't stay far from here either. An' Ah'll do it
too, if he don't let off pickin' on me."

"Who's that?"

"That big squirt Anderson they made a file closer at drill
yesterday. He seems to think that just because Ah'm littler than
him he can do anything he likes with me."

Andrews turned sharply and looked in his companion's face;
something in the gruffness of the boy's tone startled him. He was
not accustomed to this. He had thought of himself as a passionate
person, but never in his life had he wanted to kill a man.

"D'you really want to kill him?"

"Not now, but he gits the hell started in me, the way he teases
me. Ah pulled ma knife on him yisterday. You wasn't there. Didn't
ye notice Ah looked sort o' upsot at drill?"

"Yes...but how old are you, Chris!"

"Ah'm twenty. You're older than me, ain't yer?"

"I'm twenty-two."

They were leaning against the wall of their barracks, looking up
at the brilliant starry night.

"Say, is the stars the same over there, overseas, as they is
here?"

"I guess so," said Andrews, laughing. "Though I've never been to
see."

"Ah never had much schoolin'," went on Chris. "I lef school when I
was twelve, 'cause it warn't much good, an' dad drank so the folks
needed me to work on the farm."

"What do you grow in your part of the country?"

"Mostly coan. A little wheat an' tobacca. Then we raised a lot o'
stock.... But Ah was juss going to tell ye Ah nearly did kill a
guy once."

"Tell me about it."

"Ah was drunk at the time. Us boys round Tallyville was a pretty
tough bunch then. We used ter work juss long enough to git some
money to tear things up with. An' then we used to play craps an'
drink whiskey. This happened just at coan-shuckin' time. Hell, Ah
don't even know what it was about, but Ah got to quarrellin' with
a feller Ah'd been right smart friends with. Then he laid off an'
hit me in the jaw. Ah don't know what Ah done next, but before Ah
knowed it Ah had a hold of a shuck-in' knife and was slashin' at
him with it. A knife like that's a turruble thing to stab a man
with. It took four of 'em to hold me down an' git it away from me.
They didn't keep me from givin' him a good cut across the chest,
though. Ah was juss crazy drunk at the time. An' man, if Ah wasn't
a mess to go home, with half ma clothes pulled off and ma shirt
torn. Ah juss fell in the ditch an' slep' there till daylight an'
got mud all through ma hair.... Ah don't scarcely tech a drop now,
though."

"So you're in a hurry to get overseas, Chris, like me," said
Andrews after a long pause.

"Ah'll push that guy Anderson into the sea, if we both go over on
the same boat," said Chrisfield laughing; but he added after a
pause: "It would have been hell if Ah'd killed that feller,
though. Honest Ah wouldn't a-wanted to do that."



"That's the job that pays, a violinist," said somebody.

"No, it don't," came a melancholy drawling voice from a lanky man
who sat doubled up with his long face in his hands and his elbows
resting on his knees. "Just brings a living wage...a living wage."

Several men were grouped at the end of the barracks. From them the
long row of cots, with here and there a man asleep or a man
hastily undressing, stretched, lighted by occasional feeble
electric-light bulbs, to the sergeant's little table beside the
door.

"You're gettin' a dis-charge, aren't you?" asked a man with a
brogue, and the red face of a jovial gorilla, that signified the
bartender.

"Yes, Flannagan, I am," said the lanky man dolefully.

"Ain't he got hard luck?" came a voice from the crowd.

"Yes, I have got hard luck, Buddy," said the lanky man, looking at
the faces about him out of sunken eyes. "I ought to be getting
forty dollars a week and here I am getting seven and in the army
besides."

"I meant that you were gettin' out of this goddam army."

"The army, the army, the democratic army," chanted someone under
his breath.

"But, begorry, I want to go overseas and 'ave a look at the 'uns,"
said Flannagan, who managed with strange skill to combine a
cockney whine with his Irish brogue.

"Overseas?" took up the lanky man. "If I could have gone an'
studied overseas, I'd be making as much as Kubelik. I had the
makings of a good player in me."

"Why don't you go?" asked Andrews, who stood on the outskirts with
Fuselli and Chris.

"Look at me...t. b.," said the lanky man.

"Well, they can't get me over there soon enough," said Flannagan.

"Must be funny not bein' able to understand what folks say. They
say 'we' over there when they mean 'yes,' a guy told me."

"Ye can make signs to them, can't ye?" said Flannagan "an' they
can understand an Irishman anywhere. But ye won't 'ave to talk to
the 'uns. Begorry I'll set up in business when I get there, what
d'ye think of that?"

Everybody laughed.

"How'd that do? I'll start an Irish House in Berlin, I will, and
there'll be O'Casey and O'Ryan and O'Reilly and O'Flarrety, and
begod the King of England himself'll come an' set the goddam
Kaiser up to a drink."

"The Kaiser'll be strung up on a telephone pole by that time; ye
needn't worry, Flannagan."

"They ought to torture him to death, like they do niggers when
they lynch 'em down south."

A bugle sounded far away outside on the parade ground. Everyone
slunk away silently to his cot.

John Andrews arranged himself carefully in his blankets, promising
himself a quiet time of thought before going to sleep. He needed
to be awake and think at night this way, so that he might not lose
entirely the thread of his own life, of the life he would take up
again some day if he lived through it. He brushed away the thought
of death. It was uninteresting. He didn't care anyway. But some
day he would want to play the piano again, to write music. He must
not let himself sink too deeply into the helpless mentality of the
soldier. He must keep his will power.

No, but that was not what he had wanted to think about. He was so
bored with himself. At any cost he must forget himself. Ever since
his first year at college he seemed to have done nothing but think
about himself, talk about himself.  At least at the bottom, in the
utterest degradation of slavery, he could find forgetfulness and
start rebuilding the fabric of his life, out of real things this
time, out of work and comradeship and scorn. Scorn--that was the
quality he needed. It was such a raw, fantastic world he had
suddenly fallen into. His life before this week seemed a dream read
in a novel, a picture he had seen in a shop window--it was so
different. Could it have been in the same world at all? He must
have died without knowing it and been born again into a new,
futile hell.

When he had been a child he had lived in a dilapidated mansion
that stood among old oaks and chestnuts, beside a road where
buggies and oxcarts passed rarely to disturb the sandy ruts that
lay in the mottled shade. He had had so many dreams; lying under
the crepe-myrtle bush at the end of the overgrown garden he had
passed the long  Virginia afternoons, thinking, while  the
dryflies whizzed sleepily in the sunlight, of the world he would
live in when he grew up. He had planned so many lives for himself:
a general, like Caesar, he was to conquer the world and die
murdered in a great marble hall; a wandering minstrel, he would go
through all countries singing and have intricate endless
adventures; a great musician, he would sit at the piano playing,
like Chopin in the engraving, while beautiful women wept and men
with long, curly hair hid their faces in their hands. It was only
slavery that he had not foreseen. His race had dominated for too
many centuries for that. And yet the world was made of various
slaveries.

John Andrews lay on his back on his cot while everyone about him
slept and snored in the dark barracks. A certain terror held him.
In a week the great structure of his romantic world, so full of
many colors and harmonies, that had survived school and college
and the buffeting of making a living in New York, had fallen in
dust about him. He was utterly in the void. "How silly," he
thought; "this is the world as it has appeared to the majority of
men, this is just the lower half of the pyramid."

He thought of his friends, of Fuselli and Chrisfield and that
funny little man Eisenstein. They seemed at home in this army
life. They did not seem appalled by the loss of their liberty. But
they had never lived in the glittering other world. Yet he could
not feel the scorn of them he wanted to feel. He thought of them
singing under the direction of the "Y" man:

"Hail, Hail, the gang's all here;
 We're going to get the Kaiser,
 We're going to get the Kaiser,
 We're going to get the Kaiser,
 Now!"

He thought of himself and Chrisfield picking up cigarette butts
and the tramp, tramp, tramp of feet on the drill field. Where was
the connection? Was this all futile madness? They'd come from such
various worlds, all these men sleeping about him, to be united in
this. And what did they think of it, all these sleepers? Had they
too not had dreams when they were boys? Or had the generations
prepared them only for this?

He thought of himself lying under the crepe-myrtle bush through
the hot, droning afternoon, watching the pale magenta flowers
flutter down into the dry grass, and felt, again, wrapped in his
warm blankets among all these sleepers, the straining of limbs
burning with desire to rush untrammelled through some new keen
air. Suddenly darkness overspread his mind.


He woke with a start. The bugle was blowing outside.

"All right, look lively!" the sergeant was shouting. Another day.



                             IV

The stars were very bright when Fuselli, eyes stinging with sleep,
stumbled out of the barracks. They trembled like bits of brilliant
jelly in the black velvet of the sky, just as something inside him
trembled with excitement.

"Anybody know where the electricity turns on?" asked the sergeant
in a good-humored voice. "Here it is." The light over the door of
the barracks snapped on, revealing a rotund cheerful man with a
little yellow mustache and an unlit cigarette dangling out of the
corner of his mouth. Grouped about him, in overcoats and caps, the
men of the company rested their packs against their knees.

"All right; line up, men."

Eyes looked curiously at Fuselli as he lined up with the rest. He
had been transferred into the company the night before.

"Attenshun," shouted the sergeant. Then he wrinkled up his eyes
and grinned hard at the slip of paper he had in his hand, while
the men of his company watched him affectionately.

"Answer 'Here' when your name is called. Allan, B.C."

"Yo!" came a shrill voice from the end of the line.

"Anspach."

"Here."

Meanwhile outside the other barracks other companies could be
heard calling the roll. Somewhere from the end of the street came
a cheer.

"Well, I guess I can tell you now, fellers," said the sergeant
with his air of quiet omniscience, when he had called the last
name. "We're going overseas."

Everybody cheered.

"Shut up, you don't want the Huns to hear us, do you?"

The company laughed, and there was a broad grin on the sergeant's
round face.

"Seem to have a pretty decent top-kicker," whispered Fuselli to
the man next to him.

"You bet yer, kid, he's a peach," said the other man in a voice
full of devotion. "This is some company, I can tell you that."

"You bet it is," said the next man along. "The corporal's in the
Red Sox outfield."

The lieutenant appeared suddenly in the area of light in front of
the barracks. He was a pink-faced boy. His trench coat, a little
too large, was very new and stuck out stiffly from his legs.

"Everything all right, sergeant? Everything all right?" he asked
several times, shifting his weight from one foot to the other.

"All ready  for entrainment, sir,"  said the  sergeant
heartily.

"Very good, I'll let you know the order of march in a minute."

Fuselli's ears pounded with strange excitement. These phrases,
"entrainment," "order of march," had a businesslike sound. He
suddenly started to wonder how it would feel to be under fire.
Memories of movies flickered in his mind.

"Gawd, ain't I glad to git out o' this hell-hole," he said
to the man next him.

"The next one may be more of a hell-hole yet, buddy," said the
sergeant striding up and down with his important confident walk.

Everybody laughed.

"He's some sergeant, our sergeant is," said the man next to
Fuselli. "He's got brains in his head, that boy has."

"All right, break ranks," said the sergeant, "but if anybody moves
away from this barracks, I'll put him in K. P. Till--till he'll be
able to peel spuds in his sleep."

The company laughed again. Fuselli noticed with displeasure that
the tall man with the shrill voice whose name had been called
first on the roll did not laugh but spat disgustedly out of the
corner of his mouth.

"Well, there are bad eggs in every good bunch," thought Fuselli.

It gradually grew grey with dawn. Fuselli's legs were tired from
standing so long. Outside all the barracks, as far as he could see
up the street, men stood in ragged lines waiting.

The sun rose hot on a cloudless day. A few sparrows twittered
about the tin roof of the barracks.

"Hell, we're not goin' this day."

"Why?" asked somebody savagely.

"Troops always leaves at night."

"The hell they do!"

"Here comes Sarge."

Everybody craned their necks in the direction pointed out.

The sergeant strolled up with a mysterious smile on his face.

"Put away your overcoats and get out your mess kits."

Mess kits clattered and gleamed in the slanting rays of the sun.
They marched to the mess hall and back again, lined up again with
packs and waited some more.

Everybody began to get tired and peevish. Fuselli wondered where
his old friends of the other company were. They were good kids
too, Chris and that educated fellow, Andrews. Tough luck they
couldn't have come along.

The sun rose higher. Men sneaked into the barracks one by one and
lay down on the bare cots.

"What you want to bet we won't leave this camp for a week yet?"
asked someone.

At noon they lined up for mess again, ate dismally and hurriedly.
As Fuselli was leaving the mess hall tapping a tattoo on his kit
with two dirty finger nails, the corporal spoke to him in a low
voice.

"Be sure to wash yer kit, buddy. We may have pack inspection."

The corporal was a slim yellow-faced man with a wrinkled skin,
though he was still young, and an arrow-shaped mouth that opened
and shut like the paper mouths children make.

"All right, corporal," Fuselli answered cheerfully. He wanted to
make a good impression. "Fellers'll be sayin' 'All right,
corporal,' to me soon," he thought. An idea that he repelled came
into his mind. The corporal didn't look strong. He wouldn't last
long overseas. And he pictured Mabe writing Corporal Dan Fuselli,
O.A.R.D.5.

At the end of the afternoon, the lieutenant appeared suddenly, his
face flushed, his trench coat stiffer than ever.

"All right, sergeant; line up your men," he said in a breathless
voice.

All down the camp street companies were forming. One by one they
marched out in columns of fours and halted with their packs on.
The day was getting amber with sunset. Retreat sounded.

Fuselli's mind had suddenly become very active. The notes of the
bugle and of the band playing "The Star Spangled Banner" sifted
into his consciousness through a dream of what it would be like
over there. He was in a place like the Exposition ground, full of
old men and women in peasant costume, like in the song, "When It's
Apple Blossom Time in Normandy." Men in spiked helmets who looked
like firemen kept charging through, like the Ku-Klux Klan in the
movies, jumping from their horses and setting fire to buildings
with strange outlandish gestures, spitting babies on their long
swords. Those were the Huns. Then there were flags blowing very
hard in the wind, and the sound of a band. The Yanks were coming.
Everything was lost in a scene from a movie in which khaki-clad
regiments marched fast, fast across the scene. The memory of the
shouting that always accompanied it drowned out the picture. "The
guns must make a racket, though," he added as an after-thought.

"Atten-shun!

"Forwa--ard, march!"

The long street of the camp was full of the tramping of feet. They
were off. As they passed through the gate Fuselli caught a glimpse
of Chris standing with his arm about Andrews's shoulders. They
both waved. Fuselli grinned and expanded his chest. They were just
rookies still. He was going overseas.

The weight of the pack tugged at his shoulders and made his feet
heavy as if they were charged with lead. The sweat ran down his
close-clipped head under the overseas cap and streamed into his
eyes and down the sides of his nose. Through the tramp of feet he
heard confusedly cheering from the sidewalk. In front of him the
backs of heads and the swaying packs got smaller, rank by rank up
the street. Above them flags dangled from windows, flags leisurely
swaying in the twilight. But the weight of the pack, as the column
marched under arc lights glaring through the afterglow, inevitably
forced his head to droop forward. The soles of boots and legs
wrapped in puttees and the bottom strap of the pack of the man
ahead of him were all he could see. The pack seemed heavy enough
to push him through the asphalt pavement. And all about him was
the faint jingle of equipment and the tramp of feet. Every part of
him was full of sweat. He could feel vaguely the steam of sweat
that rose from the ranks of struggling bodies about him. But
gradually he forgot everything but the pack tugging at his
shoulders, weighing down his thighs and ankles and feet, and the
monotonous rhythm of his feet striking the pavement and of the
other feet, in front of him, behind him, beside him, crunching,
crunching.



The train smelt of new uniforms on which the sweat had dried, and
of the smoke of cheap cigarettes. Fuselli awoke with a start. He
had been asleep with his head on Bill Grey's shoulder. It was
already broad daylight. The train was jolting slowly over cross-
tracks in some dismal suburb, full of long soot-smeared warehouses
and endless rows of freight cars, beyond which lay brown marshland
and slate-grey stretches of water.

"God! that must be the Atlantic Ocean," cried Fuselli in
excitement.

"Ain't yer never seen it before? That's the Perth River," said
Bill Grey scornfully.

"No, I come from the Coast."

They stuck their heads out of the window side by side so that
their cheeks touched.

"Gee, there's some skirts," said Bill Grey. The train jolted to a
stop. Two untidy red-haired girls were standing beside the track
waving their hands.

"Give us a kiss," cried Bill Grey.

"Sure," said a girl,--"anythin' fer one of our boys."

She stood on tiptoe and Grey leaned far out of the window, just
managing to reach the girl's forehead.

Fuselli felt a flush of desire all over him.

"Hol' onter my belt," he said. "I'll kiss her right."

He leaned far out, and, throwing his arms around the girl's pink
gingham shoulders, lifted her off the ground and kissed her
furiously on the lips.

"Lemme go, lemme go," cried the girl. Men leaning out of the other
windows of the car cheered and shouted.

Fuselli kissed her again and then dropped her.

"Ye're too rough, damn ye," said the girl angrily.

A man from one of the windows yelled, "I'll go an' tell mommer";
and everybody laughed. The train moved on. Fuselli looked about
him proudly. The image of Mabe giving him the five-pound box
of candy rose a moment in his mind.

"Ain't no harm in havin' a little fun. Don't mean nothin'," he
said aloud.

"You just wait till we hit France. We'll hit it up some with the
Madimerzels, won't we, kid?" said Bill Grey, slapping Fuselli on
the knee.

"Beautiful Katy,
 Ki-Ki-Katy,
 You're the only gugugu-girl that I adore;
 And when the mo-moon shines
 Over the cowshed,
 I'll be waiting at the ki-ki-ki-kitchen door."

Everybody sang as the thumping of wheels over rails grew faster.
Fuselli looked about contentedly at the company sprawling over
their packs and equipment in the smoky car.

"It's great to be a soldier," he said to Bill Grey. "Ye kin do
anything ye goddam please."



"This," said the corporal, as the company filed into barracks
identical to those they had left two days before, "is an
embarkation camp, but I'd like to know where the hell we embark
at." He twisted his face into a smile, and then shouted with
lugubrious intonation: "Fall in for mess."

It was pitch dark in that part of the camp. The electric lights
had a sparse reddish glow. Fuselli kept straining his eyes,
expecting to see a wharf and the masts of a ship at the end of
every alley. The line filed into a dim mess hall, where a thin
stew was splashed into the mess kits. Behind the counter of the
kitchen the non-coms, the jovial first sergeant, and the business-
like sergeant who looked like a preacher, and the wrinkled-faced
corporal who had been on the Red Sox outfield, could be seen
eating steak. A faint odor of steak frying went through the mess
hall and made the thin chilly stew utterly tasteless in
comparison.

Fuselli looked enviously towards the kitchen and thought of the
day when he would be a non-com too. "I got to get busy," he said
to himself earnestly. Overseas, under fire, he'd have a chance to
show what he was worth; and he pictured himself heroically
carrying a wounded captain back to a dressing tent, pursued by
fierce-whiskered men with spiked helmets like firemen's helmets.

The strumming of a guitar came strangely down the dark street of
the camp.

"Some guy sure can play," said Bill Grey who, with his hands in
his pockets, slouched along beside Fuselli.

They looked in the door of one of the barracks. A lot of soldiers
were sitting in a ring round two tall negroes whose black faces
and chests glistened like jet in the faint light.

"Come on, Charley, give us another," said someone.

"Do Ah git it now, or mus' Ah hesit-ate?"

One negro began chanting while the other strummed carelessly on
the guitar.

"No, give us the 'Titanic.'"

The guitar strummed in a crooning rag-time for a moment. The
negro's voice broke into it suddenly, pitched high.

"Dis is de song ob de Titanic,
 Sailin' on de sea."

The guitar strummed on. There had been a tension in the negro's
voice that had made everyone stop talking. The soldiers looked at
him curiously.

"How de Titanic ran in dat cole iceberg,
 How de Titanic ran in dat cole iceberg
 Sailin' on de sea."

His voice was confidential and soft, and the guitar strummed to
the same sobbing rag-time. Verse after verse the voice grew louder
and the strumming faster.

"De Titanic's sinkin' in de deep blue,
 Sinkin' in de deep blue, deep blue,
 Sinkin' in de sea.
 O de women an' de chilen a-floatin' in de sea,
 O de women an' de chilen a-floatin' in de sea,
 Roun' dat cole iceberg,
 Sung 'Nearer, my gawd, to Thee,'
 Sung 'Nearer, my gawd, to Thee,
 Nearer to Thee.'"

The guitar was strumming the hymn-tune. The negro was singing with
every cord in his throat taut, almost sobbing.

A man next to Fuselli took careful aim and spat into the box of
sawdust in the middle of the ring of motionless soldiers.

The guitar played the rag-time again, fast, almost mockingly. The
negro sang in low confidential tones.

"O de women an' de chilen dey sank in de sea.
 O de women an' de chilen dey sank in de sea,
 Roun' dat cole iceberg."

Before he had finished a bugle blew in the distance. Everybody
scattered.

Fuselli and Bill Grey went silently back to their barracks.

"It must be an awful thing to drown in the sea," said Grey as he
rolled himself in his blankets. "If one of those bastard
U-boats..."

"I don't give a damn," said Fuselli boisterously; but as he lay
staring into the darkness, cold terror stiffened him suddenly. He
thought for a moment of deserting, pretending he was sick,
anything to keep from going on the transport.

"O de women an' de chilen dey sank in de sea,
 Roun" dat cole iceberg."

He could feel himself going down through icy water. "It's a hell
of a thing to send a guy over there to drown," he said to himself,
and he thought of the hilly streets of San Francisco, and the glow
of the sunset over the harbor and ships coming in through the
Golden Gate. His mind went gradually blank and he went to sleep.


The column was like some curious khaki-colored carpet, hiding the
road as far as you could see. In Fuselli's company the men were
shifting their weight from one foot to the other, muttering, "What
the hell a' they waiting for now?" Bill Grey, next to Fuselli in
the ranks, stood bent double so as to take the weight of his pack
off his shoulders. They were at a cross-roads on fairly high
ground so that they could see the long sheds and barracks of the
camp stretching away in every direction, in rows and rows, broken
now and then by a grey drill field. In front of them the column
stretched to the last bend in the road, where it disappeared on a
hill among mustard-yellow suburban houses.

Fuselli was excited. He kept thinking of the night before, when he
had helped the sergeant distribute emergency rations, and had
carried about piles of boxes of hard bread, counting them
carefully without a mistake. He felt full of desire to do things,
to show what he was good for. "Gee," he said to himself, "this
war's a lucky thing for me. I might have been in the R.C. Vicker
Company's store for five years an' never got a raise, an' here in
the army I got a chance to do almost anything."

Far ahead down the road the column was beginning to move. Voices
shouting orders beat crisply on the morning air. Fuselli's heart
was thumping. He felt proud of himself and of the company--the
damn best company in the whole outfit. The company ahead was
moving, it was their turn now.

"Forwa--ard, march!"

They were lost in the monotonous tramp of feet. Dust rose from the
road, along which like a drab brown worm crawled the column.



A sickening unfamiliar smell choked their nostrils.

"What are they taking us down here for?"

"Damned if I know."

They were filing down ladders into the terrifying pit which the
hold of the ship seemed to them. Every man had a blue card in his
hand with a number on it. In a dim place like an empty warehouse
they stopped. The sergeant shouted out:

"I guess this is our diggings. We'll have to make the best of it."
Then he disappeared.

Fuselli looked about him. He was sitting in one of the lowest of
three tiers of bunks roughly built of new pine boards. Electric
lights placed here and there gave a faint reddish tone to the
gloom, except at the ladders, where high-power lamps made a white
glare. The place was full of tramping of feet and the sound of
packs being thrown on bunks as endless files of soldiers poured in
down every ladder. Somewhere down the alley an officer with a
shrill voice was shouting to his men: "Speed it up there; speed it
up there." Fuselli sat on his bunk looking at the terrifying
confusion all about, feeling bewildered and humiliated. For how
many days would they be in that dark pit? He suddenly felt angry.
They had no right to treat a feller like that. He was a man, not a
bale of hay to be bundled about as anybody liked.

"An' if we're torpedoed a fat chance we'll have down here," he
said aloud.

"They got sentries posted to keep us from goin up on deck," said
someone.

"God damn them. They treat you like you was a steer being taken
over for meat."

"Well, you're not a damn sight more. Meat for the guns."

A little man lying in one of the upper bunks had spoken suddenly,
contracting his sallow face into a curious spasm, as if the words
had burst from him in spite of an effort to keep them in.

Everybody looked up at him angrily.

"That goddam kike Eisenstein," muttered someone.

"Say, tie that bull outside," shouted Bill Grey good-naturedly.

"Fools," muttered Eisenstein, turning over and burying his face in
his hands.

"Gee, I wonder what it is makes it smell so funny down here," said
Fuselli.


Fuselli lay flat on deck resting his head on his crossed arms.
When he looked straight up he could see a lead-colored mast sweep
back and forth across the sky full of clouds of light grey and
silver and dark purplish-grey showing yellowish at the edges. When
he tilted his head a little to one side he could see Bill Grey's
heavy colorless face and the dark bristles of his unshaven chin
and his mouth a little twisted to the left, from which a cigarette
dangled unlighted. Beyond were heads and bodies huddled together
in a mass of khaki overcoats and life preservers. And when the
roll tipped the deck he had a view of moving green waves and of a
steamer striped grey and white, and the horizon, a dark taut line,
broken here and there by the tops of waves.

"O God, I feel sick," said Bill Grey, taking the cigarette out of
his mouth and looking at it revengefully.

"I'd be all right if everything didn't stink so. An' that mess
hall. Nearly makes a guy puke to think of it." Fuselli spoke in a
whining voice, watching the top of the mast move like a pencil
scrawling on paper, back and forth across the mottled clouds.

"You belly-achin' again?" A brown moon-shaped face with thick
black eyebrows and hair curling crisply about a forehead with many
horizontal wrinkles rose from the deck on the other side of
Fuselli.

"Get the hell out of here."

"Feel sick, sonny?" came the deep voice again, and the dark
eyebrows contracted in an expression of sympathy. "Funny, I'd have
my sixshooter out if I was home and you told me to get the hell
out, sonny."

"Well, who wouldn't be sore when they have to go on K.P.?" said
Fuselli peevishly.

"I ain't been down to mess in three days. A feller who lives on
the plains like I do ought to take to the sea like a duck, but it
don't seem to suit me."

"God, they're a sick lookin' bunch I have to sling the hash to,"
said Fuselli more cheerfully. "I don't know how they get that way.
The fellers in our company ain't that way. They look like they was
askeered somebody was going to hit 'em. Ever noticed that,
Meadville?"

"Well, what d'ye expect of you guys who live in the city all your
lives and don't know the butt from the barrel of a gun an' never
straddled anything more like a horse than a broomstick. Ye're juss
made to be sheep. No wonder they have to herd you round like
calves." Meadville got to his feet and went unsteadily to the
rail, keeping, as he threaded his way through the groups that
covered the transport's after deck, a little of his cowboy's bow-
legged stride.

"I know what it is that makes men's eyes blink when they go down
to that putrid mess," came a nasal voice.

Fuselli turned round.

Eisenstein was sitting in the place Meadville had just left.

"You do, do you?"

"It's part of the system. You've got to turn men into beasts
before ye can get 'em to act that way. Ever read Tolstoi?"

"No. Say, you want to be careful how you go talkin' around the way
you do." Fuselli lowered his voice confidentially. "I heard of a
feller bein' shot at Camp Merritt for talkin' around."

"I don't care.... I'm a desperate man," said Eisenstein.

"Don't ye feel sick? Gawd, I do.... Did you get rid o' any of it,
Meadville?"

"Why don't they fight their ole war somewhere a man can get to on
a horse?...   Say that's my seat."

"The place was empty.... I sat down in it," said Eisenstein,
lowering his head sullenly.

"You kin have three winks to get out o' my place," said Meadville,
squaring his broad shoulders.

"You are stronger than me," said Eisenstein, moving off.

''God, it's hell not to have a gun," muttered Meadville as he
settled himself on the deck again. "D'ye know, sonny, I nearly
cried when I found I was going to be in this damn medical corps? I
enlisted for the tanks. This is the first time in my life I
haven't had a gun. I even think I had one in my cradle."

"That's funny," said Fuselli.

The sergeant appeared suddenly in the middle of the group, his
face red.

"Say, fellers," he said in a low voice, "go down an' straighten
out the bunks as fast as you goddam can. They're having an
inspection. It's a hell of a note."

They all filed down the gang planks into the foul-smelling hold,
where there was no light but the invariable reddish glow of
electric bulbs. They had hardly reached their bunks when someone
called, "Attention!"

Three officers stalked by, their firm important tread a little
disturbed by the rolling. Their heads were stuck forward and they
peered from side to side among the bunks with the cruel, searching
glance of hens looking for worms.



"Fuselli," said the first sergeant, "bring up the record book to
my stateroom; 213 on the lower deck."

"All right, Sarge," said Fuselli with alacrity. He admired the
first sergeant and wished he could imitate his jovial, domineering
manner.

It was the first time he had been in the upper part of the ship.
It seemed a different world. The long corridors with red carpets,
the white paint and the gilt mouldings on the partitions, the
officers strolling about at their ease--it all made him think of
the big liners he used to watch come in through the Golden Gate,
the liners he was going to Europe on some day, when he got rich.
Oh, if he could only get to be a sergeant first-class, all this
comfort and magnificence would be his. He found the number and
knocked on the door. Laughter and loud talking came from inside
the stateroom.

"Wait a sec!" came an unfamiliar voice.

"Sergeant Olster here?"

"Oh, it's one o' my gang," came the sergeant's voice. "Let him in.
He won't peach on us."

The door opened and he saw Sergeant Olster and two other young men
sitting with their feet dangling over the red varnished boards
that enclosed the bunks. They were talking gaily, and had glasses
in their hands.

"Paris is some town, I can tell you," one was saying. "They say
the girls come up an' put their arms round you right in the main
street."

"Here's the records, sergeant," said Fuselli stiffly in his
best military manner.

"Oh thanks.... There's nothing else I want," said the sergeant,
his voice more jovial than ever. "Don't fall overboard like the
guy in Company C."

Fuselli laughed as he closed the door, growing serious suddenly on
noticing that one of the young men wore in his shirt the gold bar
of a second lieutenant.

"Gee," he said to himself. "I ought to have saluted."

He waited a moment outside the closed door of the stateroom,
listening to the talk and the laughter, wishing he were one of
that merry group talking about women in Paris. He began thinking.
Sure he'd get private first-class as soon as they got overseas.
Then in a couple of months he might be corporal. If they saw much
service, he'd move along all right, once he got to be a non-com.

"Oh, I mustn't get in wrong. Oh, I mustn't get in wrong," he kept
saying to himself as he went down the ladder into the hold. But he
forgot everything in the seasickness that came on again as he
breathed in the fetid air.



The deck now slanted down in front of him, now rose so that he was
walking up an incline. Dirty water slushed about from one side of
the passage to the other with every lurch of the ship. When he
reached the door the whistling howl of the wind through the hinges
and cracks made Fuselli hesitate a long time with his hand on the
knob. The  moment he turned the knob the door flew open and he was
in the full sweep of the wind. The deck was deserted. The wet
ropes strung along it shivered dismally in the wind. Every other
moment came the rattle of spray, that rose up in white fringy
trees to windward and smashed against him like hail. Without
closing the door he crept forward along the deck, clinging as hard
as he could to the icy rope. Beyond the spray he could see huge
marbled green waves rise in constant succession out of the mist.
The roar of the wind in his ears confused him and terrified him.
It seemed ages before he reached the door of the forward house
that opened on a passage that smelt of drugs; and breathed out
air, where men waited in a packed line, thrown one against the
other by the lurching of the boat, to get into the dispensary. The
roar of the wind came to them faintly, and only now and then the
hollow thump of a wave against the bow.

"You sick?" a man asked Fuselli.

"Naw, I'm not sick; but Sarge sent me to get some stuff for some
guys that's too sick to move."

"An awful lot o' sickness on this boat."

"Two fellers died this mornin' in that there room," said another
man solemnly, pointing over his shoulder with a jerk of the thumb.
"Ain't buried 'em yet. It's too rough."

"What'd they die of?" asked Fuselli eagerly.

"Spinal somethin'...."

"Menegitis," broke in a man at the end of the line.

"Say, that's awful catchin' ain't it?"

"It sure is."

"Where does it hit yer?" asked Fuselli.

"Yer neck swells up, an' then you juss go stiff all over," came
the man's voice from the end of the line.

There was a silence. From the direction of the infirmary a man
with a packet of medicines in his hand began making his way
towards the door.

"Many guys in there?" asked Fuselli in a low voice as the man
brushed past him.

When the door closed again the man beside Fuselli, who was tall
and broad shouldered with heavy black eyebrows, burst out, as if
he were saying something he'd been trying to keep from saying for
a long while:

"It won't be right if that sickness gets me; indeed it won't....
I've got a girl waitin' for me at home. It's two years since I
ain't touched a woman all on account of her. It ain't natural for
a fellow to go so long as that.

"Why didn't you marry her before you left?" somebody asked
mockingly.

"Said she didn't want to be no war bride, that she could wait for
me better if I didn't."

Several men laughed.

"It wouldn't be right if I took sick an' died of this sickness,
after keepin' myself clean on account of that girl.... It wouldn't
be right," the man muttered again to Fuselli.

Fuselli was picturing himself lying in his bunk with a swollen
neck, while his arms and legs stiffened, stiffened.

A red-faced man half way up the passage started speaking:

"When I thinks to myself how much the folks need me home, it makes
me feel sort o' confident-like, I dunno why. I juss can't cash in
my checks, that's all." He laughed jovially.

No one joined in the laugh.

"Is it awfully catchin'?" asked Fuselli of the man next him.

"Most catchin' thing there is," he answered solemnly. "The worst
of it is," another man was muttering in a shrill hysterical voice,
"bein' thrown over to the sharks. Gee, they ain't got a right to
do that, even if it is war time, they ain't got a right to treat a
Christian like he was a dead dawg."

"They got a right to do anythin' they goddam please, buddy. Who's
goin' to stop 'em I'd like to know," cried the red-faced man.

"If he was an awficer, they wouldn't throw him over like that,"
came the shrill hysterical voice again.

"Cut that," said someone else, "no use gettin' in wrong juss for
the sake of talkin'."

"But ain't it dangerous, waitin' round up here so near where those
fellers are with that sickness," whispered Fuselli to the man next
him.

"Reckon it is, buddy," came the other man's voice dully.

Fuselli started making his way toward the door.

"Lemme out, fellers, I've got to puke," he said. "Shoot," he was
thinking, "I'll tell 'em the place was closed; they'll never come
to look."

As he opened the door he thought of himself crawling back to his
bunk and feeling his neck swell and his hands burn with fever and
his arms and legs stiffen until everything would be effaced in the
blackness of death. But the roar of the wind and the lash of the
spray as he staggered back along the deck drowned all other
thought.



Fuselli and another man carried the dripping garbage-can up the
ladder that led up from the mess hall. It smelt of rancid grease
and coffee grounds and greasy juice trickled over their fingers as
they struggled with it. At last they burst out on to the deck
where a free wind blew out of the black night. They staggered
unsteadily to the rail and emptied the pail into the darkness. The
splash was lost in the sound of the waves and of churned water
fleeing along the sides. Fuselli leaned over the rail and looked
down at the faint phosphorescence that was the only light in the
whole black gulf. He had never seen such darkness before. He
clutched hold of the rail with both hands, feeling lost and
terrified in the blackness, in the roaring of the wind in his ears
and the sound of churned water fleeing astern. The alternative was
the stench of below decks.

"I'll bring down the rosie, don't you bother," he said to the
other man, kicking the can that gave out a ringing sound as he
spoke.

He strained his eyes to make out something. The darkness seemed to
press in upon his eyeballs, blinding him. Suddenly he noticed
voices near him. Two men were talking.

"I ain't never seen the sea before this, I didn't know it
was like this."

"We're in the zone, now."

"That means we may go down any minute."

"Yare."

"Christ, how black it is.... It'ld be awful to drown in the dark
like this."

"It'ld be over soon."

"Say, Fred, have you ever been so skeered that...?"

"D'you feel a-skeert?"

"Feel my hand, Fred.... No.... There it is. God, it's so hellish
black you can't see yer own hand."

"It's cold. Why are you shiverin' so? God, I wish I had a drink."

"I  ain't   never   seen   the   sea   before...I   didn't
know..."

Fuselli heard distinctly the man's teeth chattering in the
darkness.

"God, pull yerself together, kid. You can't be skeered
like this."

"O God."

There was a long pause. Fuselli heard nothing but the churned
water speeding along the ship's side and the wind roaring in his
ears.

"I ain't never seen the sea before this time, Fred, an' it sort o'
gits my goat, all this sickness an' all.... They dropped three of
'em overboard yesterday."

"Hell, kid, don't think of it."

"Say, Fred, if I...if I...if you're saved, Fred, an' not me,
you'll write to my folks, won't you?"

"Indeed I will. But I reckon you an' me'll both go down together."

"Don't say that. An' you won't forget to write that girl I gave
you the address of?"

"You'll do the same for me."

"Oh, no, Fred, I'll never see land.... Oh, it's no use. An' I feel
so well an' husky.... I don't want to die. I can't die like this."

"If it only wasn't so goddam black."



                PART TWO: THE METAL COOLS

                            I

It was purplish dusk outside the window. The rain fell steadily
making long flashing stripes on the cracked panes, beating a
hard monotonous tattoo on the tin roof overhead. Fuselli had
taken off his wet slicker and stood in front of the window
looking out dismally at the rain. Behind him was the smoking
stove into which a man was poking wood, and beyond that a few
broken folding chairs on which soldiers sprawled in attitudes
of utter boredom, and the counter where the "Y" man stood with
a set smile doling out chocolate to a line of men that filed past.

"Gee, you have to line up for everything here, don't you?" Fuselli
muttered.

"That's about all you do do in this hell-hole, buddy," said a man
beside him.

The man pointed with his thumb at the window and said again:

"See that rain? Well, I been in this camp three weeks and it ain't
stopped rainin' once. What d'yer think of that fer a country?"

"It certainly ain't like home," said Fuselli. "I'm going to have
some chauclate."

"It's damn rotten."

"I might as well try it once."

Fuselli slouched over to the end of the line and stood waiting his
turn. He was thinking of the steep streets of San Francisco and
the glimpses he used to get of the harbor full of yellow lights,
the color of amber in a cigarette holder, as he went home from
work through the blue dusk. He had begun to think of Mabe handing
him the five-pound box of candy when his attention was distracted
by the talk of the men behind him. The man next to him was
speaking with hurried nervous intonation. Fuselli could feel his
breath on the back of his neck.

"I'll be goddamned," the man said, "was you there too? Where d'you
get yours?"

"In the leg; it's about all right, though."

"I ain't. I won't never be all right. The doctor says I'm all
right now, but I know I'm not, the lyin' fool."

"Some time, wasn't it?"

"I'll be damned to hell if I do it again. I can't sleep at night
thinkin' of the shape of the Fritzies' helmets. Have you ever
thought that there was somethin' about the shape of them goddam
helmets...?"

"Ain't they just or'nary shapes?" asked Fuselli, half turning
round. "I seen 'em in the movies." He laughed apologetically.

"Listen to the rookie, Tub, he's seen 'em in the movies!" said the
man with the nervous twitch in his voice, laughing a croaking
little laugh. "How long you been in this country, buddy?"

"Two days."

"Well, we only been here two months, ain't we, Tub?"

"Four months; you're forgettin', kid."

The "Y" man turned his set smile on Fuselli while he filled his
tin cup up with chocolate.

"How much?"

"A franc; one of those looks like a quarter," said the "Y" man,
his well-fed voice full of amiable condescension.

"That's a hell of a lot for a cup of chauclate," said
Fuselli.

"You're at the war, young man, remember that," said the "Y" man
severely. "You're lucky to get it at all."

A cold chill gripped Fuselli's spine as he went back to the stove
to drink the chocolate. Of course he mustn't crab. He was in the
war now. If the sergeant had heard him crabbing, it might have
spoiled his chances for a corporalship. He must be careful. If he
just watched out and kept on his toes, he'd be sure to get it.

"And why ain't there no more chocolate, I want to know?" the
nervous voice of the man who had stood in line behind Fuselli rose
to a sudden shriek. Everybody looked round. The "Y" man was moving
his head from side to side in a flustered way, saying in a shrill
little voice:

"I've told you there's no more. Go away!"

"You ain't got no right to tell me to go away. You got to get me
some chocolate. You ain't never been at the front, you goddam
slacker." The man was yelling at the top of his lungs. He had hold
of the counter with two hands and swayed from side to side. His
friend was trying to pull him away.

"Look here, none of that, I'll report you," said the "Y" man. "Is
there a non-commissioned officer in the hut?"

"Go ahead, you can't do nothin'. I can't never have nothing done
worse than what's been done to me already." The man's voice had
reached a sing-song fury.

"Is there a non-commissioned officer in the room?" The "Y" man
kept looking from side to side. His little eyes were hard and
spiteful and his lips were drawn up in a thin straight line.

"Keep quiet, I'll get him away," said the other man in a low
voice. "Can't you see he's not...?"

A strange terror took hold of Fuselli. He hadn't expected things
to be like that. When he had sat in the grandstand in the training
camp and watched the jolly soldiers in khaki marching into towns,
pursuing terrified Huns across  potato fields, saving  Belgian
milk-maids against picturesque backgrounds.

"Does many of 'em come back that way?" he asked a man beside him.

"Some do. It's this convalescent camp." The man and his friend
stood side by side near the stove talking in low voices.

"Pull yourself together, kid," the friend was saying.

"All right, Tub; I'm all right now, Tub. That slacker got my goat,
that was all."

Fuselli was looking at him curiously. He had a yellow parchment
face and a high, gaunt forehead going up to sparse, curly brown
hair. His eyes had a glassy look about them when they met
Fuselli's. He smiled amiably.

"Oh, there's the kid who's seen Fritzies' helmets in the
movies.... Come on, buddy, come and have a beer at the English
canteen."

"Can you get beer?"

"Sure, over in the English camp." They went out into the slanting
rain. It was nearly dark, but the sky had a purplish-red color
that was reflected a little on the slanting sides of tents and on
the roofs of the rows of sheds that disappeared into the rainy
mist in every direction. A few lights gleamed, a very bright
polished yellow. They followed a board-walk that splashed mud up
from the puddles under the tramp of their heavy boots.

At one place they flattened themselves against the wet flap of a
tent and saluted as an officer passed waving a little cane
jauntily.

"How long does a fellow usually stay in these rest camps?" asked
Fuselli.

"Depends on what's goin' on out there," said Tub, pointing
carelessly to the sky beyond the peaks of the tents.

"You'll leave here soon enough. Don't you worry, buddy," said the
man with the nervous voice. "What you in?"

"Medical Replacement Unit."

"A medic are you? Those boys didn't last long at the Chateau, did
they, Tub?"

"No, they didn't."

Something inside Fuselli was protesting; "I'll last out though.
I'll last out though."

"Do you remember the fellers went out to get poor ole Corporal
Jones, Tub? I'll be goddamned if anybody ever found a button of
their pants." He laughed his creaky little laugh. "They got in the
way of a torpedo."

The "wet" canteen was full of smoke and a cosy steam of beer. It
was crowded with red-faced men, with shiny brass buttons on their
khaki uniforms, among whom was a good sprinkling of lanky
Americans.

"Tommies," said Fuselli to himself.

After standing in line a while, Fuselli's cup was handed back to
him across the counter, foaming with beer.

"Hello, Fuselli," Meadville clapped him on the shoulder. "You
found the liquor pretty damn quick, looks like to me."

Fuselli laughed.

"May I sit with you fellers?"

"Sure, come along," said Fuselli proudly, "these guys have been to
the front."

"You have?" asked Meadville. "The Huns are pretty good scrappers,
they say. Tell me, do you use your rifle much, or is it mostly big
gun work?"

"Naw; after all the months I spent learnin' how to drill with my
goddam rifle, I'll be a sucker if I've used it once. I'm in the
grenade squad."

Someone at the end of the room had started singing:

"O Mademerselle from Armenteers,
      Parley voo!"

The man with the nervous voice went on talking, while the song
roared about them.

"I don't spend a night without thinkin' o' them funny helmets the
Fritzies wear. Have you ever thought that there was something
goddam funny about the shape o' them helmets?"

"Can the helmets, kid," said his friend. "You told us all about
them onct."

"I ain't told you why I can't forgit 'em, have I?"

"A German officer crossed the Rhine;
     Parley voo?
 A German officer crossed the Rhine;
 He loved the women and liked the wine;
     Hanky Panky, parley voo.... "

"Listen to this, fellers," said the man in his twitching nervous
voice, staring straight into Fuselli's eyes. "We made a little
attack to straighten out our trenches a bit just before I got
winged. Our barrage cut off a bit of Fritzie's trench an' we ran
right ahead juss about dawn an' occupied it. I'll be goddamned if
it wasn't as quiet as a Sunday morning at home."

"It was!" said his friend.

"An' I had a bunch of grenades an' a feller came runnin' up to me,
whisperin', 'There's a bunch of Fritzies playin' cards in a dug-
out. They don't seem to know they're captured. We'd better take
'em pris'ners!"

"'Pris'ners, hell,' says I, 'We'll go and clear the buggars out.'
So we crept along to the steps and looked down.... "

The song had started again:

 "O Mademerselle from Armenteers,
        Parley voo?

"Their helmets looked so damn like toadstools I came near laughin'.
An' they sat round the lamp layin' down the cards serious-like,
the way I've seen Germans do in the Rathskeller at home."

 "He loved the women and liked the wine,
        Parley voo?

"I lay there lookin' at 'em for a hell of a time, an' then I
clicked a grenade an' tossed it gently down the steps. An' all
those funny helmets like toadstools popped up in the air an'
somebody gave a yell an' the light went out an' the damn grenade
went off. Then I let 'em have the rest of 'em an' went away 'cause
one o' 'em was still moanin'-like. It was about that time they let
their barrage down on us and I got mine."

"The Yanks are havin' a hell of a time,
       Parley voo?

"An' the first thing I thought of when I woke up was how those
goddam helmets looked. It upsets a feller to think of a thing like
that." His voice ended in a whine like the broken voice of a child
that has been beaten.

"You need to pull yourself together, kid," said his friend.

"I know what I need, Tub. I need a woman."

"You know where you get one?" asked Meadville. "I'd like to get me
a nice little French girl a rainy night like this."

"It must be a hell of a ways to the town.... They say it's full of
M. P.'s too," said Fuselli.

"I know a way," said the man with the nervous voice, "Come on;
Tub."

"No, I've had enough of these goddam frog women."

They all left the canteen.

As the two men went off down the side of the building, Fuselli
heard the nervous twitching voice through the metallic patter of
the rain:

"I can't find no way of forgettin' how funny the helmets looked
all round the lamp... I can't find no way.... "



Bill Grey and Fuselli pooled their blankets and slept together.
They lay on the hard floor of the tent very close to each other,
listening to the rain pattering endlessly on the drenched canvas
that slanted above their heads.

"Hell, Bill, I'm gettin' pneumonia," said Fuselli, clearing his
nose.

"That's the only thing that scares me in the whole goddam
business. I'd hate to die o' sickness...an' they say another kid's
kicked off with that--what d'they call it?--menegitis."

"Was that what was the matter with Stein?"

"The corporal won't say."

"Ole Corp. looks sort o' sick himself," said Fuselli.

"It's this rotten climate" whispered Bill Grey, in the middle of a
fit of coughing.

"For cat's sake quit that coughin'. Let a feller sleep," came a
voice from the other side of the tent.

"Go an' get a room in a hotel if you don't like it."

"That's it, Bill, tell him where to get off."

"If you fellers don't quit yellin', I'll put the whole blame lot
of you on K. P.," came the sergeant's good-natured voice.

"Don't you know that taps has blown?"

The tent was silent except for the fast patter of the rain and
Bill Grey's coughing.

"That sergeant gives me a pain in the neck," muttered Bill Grey
peevishly, when his coughing had stopped, wriggling about under
the blankets.

After a while Fuselli said in a very low voice, so that no one but
his friend should hear:

"Say, Bill, ain't it different from what we thought it was going
to be?"

"Yare."

"I mean fellers don't seem to think about beatin' the Huns at all,
they're so busy crabbin' on everything."

"It's the guys higher up that does the thinkin'," said Grey
grandiloquently.

"Hell, but I thought it'd be excitin' like in the movies."

"I guess that was a lot o' talk."

"Maybe."

Fuselli went to sleep on the hard floor, feeling the comfortable
warmth of Grey's body along the side of him, hearing the endless,
monotonous patter of the rain on the drenched canvas above his
head. He tried to stay awake a minute to remember what Mabe looked
like, but sleep closed down on him suddenly.

The bugle wrenched them out of their blankets before it was light.
It was not raining. The air was raw and full of white mist that
was cold as snow against their faces still warm from sleep. The
corporal called the roll, lighting matches to read the list. When
he dismissed the formation the sergeant's voice was heard from the
tent, where he still lay rolled in his blankets.

"Say, Corp, go an' tell Fuselli to straighten out Lieutenant
Stanford's room at eight sharp in Officers' Barracks, Number
Four."

"Did you hear, Fuselli?"

"All right," said Fuselli. His blood boiled up suddenly. This was
the first time he'd had to do servants' work. He hadn't joined the
army to be a slavey to any damned first loot. It was against army
regulations anyway. He'd go and kick. He wasn't going to be a
slavey.... He walked towards the door of the tent, thinking what
he'd say to the sergeant. But he noticed the corporal coughing
into his handkerchief with an expression of pain on his face. He
turned and strolled away. It would get him in wrong if he started
kicking like that. Much better shut his mouth and put up with it.
The poor old corp couldn't last long at this rate. No, it wouldn't
do to get in wrong.

At eight, Fuselli, with a broom in his hand, feeling dull fury
pounding and fluttering within him, knocked on the unpainted board
door.

"Who's that?"

"To clean the room, sir," said Fuselli. "Come back in about twenty
minutes," came the voice of the lieutenant.

"All right, sir."

Fuselli leaned against the back of the barracks and smoked a
cigarette. The air stung his hands as if they had been scraped by
a nutmeg-grater. Twenty minutes passed slowly. Despair seized hold
of him. He was so far from anyone who cared about him, so lost in
the vast machine. He was telling himself that he'd never get on,
would never get up where he could show what he was good for. He
felt as if he were in a treadmill. Day after day it would be like
this,--the same routine, the same helplessness. He looked at his
watch. Twenty-five minutes had passed. He picked up his broom and
moved round to the lieutenant's room.

"Come in," said the lieutenant carelessly. He was in his shirt-
sleeves, shaving. A pleasant smell of shaving soap filled the dark
clapboard room, which had no furniture but three cots and some
officers' trunks. He was a red-faced young man with flabby cheeks
and dark straight eyebrows. He had taken command of the company
only a day or two before.

"Looks like a decent feller," thought Fuselli.

"What's your name?" asked the lieutenant, speaking into the small
nickel mirror, while he ran the safety razor obliquely across his
throat. He stuttered a little. To Fuselli he seemed to speak like
an Englishman.

"Fuselli."

"Italian parentage, I presume?"

"Yes," said Fuselli sullenly, dragging one of the cots away from
the wall.

"Parla Italiano?"

"You mean, do I speak Eyetalian? Naw, sir," said Fuselli
emphatically, "I was born in Frisco."

"Indeed? But get me some more water, will you, please?"

When Fuselli came back, he stood with his broom between his knees,
blowing on his hands that were blue and stiff from carrying the
heavy bucket. The lieutenant was dressed and was hooking the top
hook of the uniform carefully. The collar made a red mark on his
pink throat.

"All right; when you're through, report back to the Company." The
lieutenant went out, drawing on a pair of khaki-colored gloves
with a satisfied and important gesture.

Fuselli walked back slowly to the tents where the Company was
quartered, looking about him at the long lines of barracks, gaunt
and dripping in the mist, at the big tin sheds of the cook shacks
where the cooks and K. P.'s in greasy blue denims were slouching
about amid a steam of cooking food.

Something of the gesture with which the lieutenant drew on his
gloves caught in the mind of Fuselli. He had seen peoople make
gestures like that in the movies, stout dignified people in
evening suits. The president of the Company that owned the optical
goods store, where he had worked, at home in Frisco, had had
something of that gesture about him.

And he pictured himself drawing on a pair of gloves that way,
importantly, finger by finger, with a little wave, of self-
satisfaction when the gesture was completed.... He'd have to get
that corporalship.

"There's a long, long trail a-winding
 Through no man's land in France."

The company sang lustily as it splashed through the mud down a
grey road between high fences covered with great tangles of barbed
wire, above which peeked the ends of warehouses and the chimneys
of factories.

The lieutenant and the top sergeant walked side by side
chatting, now and then singing a little of the song in a
deprecating way. The corporal sang, his eyes sparkling with
delight. Even the sombre sergeant who rarely spoke to anyone,
sang. The company strode along, its ninety-six legs splashing
jauntily through the deep putty-colored puddles. The packs swayed
merrily from side to side as if it were they and not the legs that
were walking.

"There's a long, long trail a-winding
 Through no man's land in France."

At last they were going somewhere. They had separated from the
contingent they had come over with. They were all alone now. They
were going to be put to work. The lieutenant strode along
importantly. The sergeant strode along importantly. The corporal
strode along importantly. The right guard strode along more
importantly than anyone. A sense of importance, of something
tremendous to do, animated the company like wine, made the packs
and the belts seem less heavy, made their necks and shoulders less
stiff from struggling with the weight of the packs, made the
ninety-six legs tramp jauntily in spite of the oozy mud and the
deep putty-colored puddles.

It was cold in the dark shed of the freight station where they
waited. Some gas lamps flickered feebly high up among the rafters,
lighting up in a ghastly way white piles of ammunition boxes and
ranks and ranks of shells that disappeared in the darkness. The
raw air was full of coal smoke and a smell of  freshly-cut boards.
The captain and the top sergeant had disappeared. The men sat
about, huddled in groups, sinking as far as they could into their
overcoats, stamping their numb wet feet on the mud-covered cement
of the floor. The sliding doors were shut. Through them came a
monotonous sound of cars shunting, of buffers bumping against
buffers, and now and then the shrill whistle of an engine.

"Hell, the French railroads are rotten," said someone.

"How d'you know?" snapped Eisenstein, who sat on a box away from
the rest with his lean face in his hands staring at his mud-
covered boots.

"Look at this," Bill Grey made a disgusted gesture towards the
ceiling. "Gas. Don't even have electric light."

"Their trains run faster than ours," said Eisenstein.

"The hell they do. Why, a fellow back in that rest camp told me
that it took four or five days to get anywhere."

"He was stuffing you," said Eisenstein. "They used to run the
fastest trains in the world in France."

"Not so fast as the 'Twentieth Century.' Goddam, I'm a railroad
man and I know."

"I want five men to help me sort out the eats," said the top
sergeant, coming suddenly out of the shadows. "Fuselli, Grey,
Eisenstein, Meadville, Williams...all right, come along."

"Say, Sarge, this guy says that frog trains are faster than our
trains. What d'ye think o' that?"

The sergeant put on his comic expression. Everybody got ready to
laugh.

"Well, if he'd rather take the side-door Pullmans we're going to
get aboard tonight than the 'Sunset Limited,' he's welcome. I've
seen 'em. You fellers haven't."

Everybody laughed. The top sergeant turned confidentially to the
five men who followed him into a small well-lighted room that
looked like a freight office.

"We've got to sort out the grub, fellers. See those cases? That's
three days' rations for the outfit. I want to sort it into three
lots, one for each car. Understand?"

Fuselli pulled open one of the boxes. The cans of bully beef flew
under his fingers. He kept looking out of the corner of his eye at
Eisenstein, who seemed very skilful in a careless way. The top
sergeant stood beaming at them with his legs wide apart. Once he
said something in a low voice to the corporal. Fuselli thought he
caught the words: "privates first-class," and his heart started
thumping hard. In a few minutes the job was done, and everybody
stood about lighting cigarettes.

"Well, fellers," said Sergeant Jones, the sombre man who rarely
spoke, "I certainly didn't reckon when I used to be teachin' and
preachin' and tendin' Sunday School and the like that I'd come to
be usin' cuss words, but I think we got a damn good company."

"Oh, we'll have you sayin' worse things than 'damn' when we get
you out on the front with a goddam German aeroplane droppin' bombs
on you," said the top sergeant, slapping him on the back. "Now, I
want you five men to look out for the grub." Fuselli's chest
swelled. "The company'll be in charge of the corporal for the
night. Sergeant Jones and I have got to be with the lieutenant,
understand?"

They all walked back to the dingy room where the rest of the
company waited huddled in their coats, trying to keep their
importance from being too obvious in their step.

"I've really started now," thought Fuselli to himself. "I've
really started now."



The bare freight car clattered and rumbled monotonously over the
rails. A bitter cold wind blew up through the cracks in the grimy
splintered boards of the floor. The men huddled in the corners of
the car, curled up together like puppies in a box. It was pitch
black. Fuselli lay half asleep, his head full of curious
fragmentary dreams, feeling through his sleep the aching cold and
the unending clattering rumble of the wheels and the bodies and
arms and legs muffled in coats and blankets pressing against him.
He woke up with a start. His teeth were chattering. The clanking
rumble of wheels seemed to be in his head. His head was being
dragged along, bumping over cold iron rails. Someone lighted a
match. The freight car's black swaying walls, the packs piled in
the center, the bodies heaped in the corners where, out of khaki
masses here and there gleamed an occasional white face or a pair
of eyes--all showed clear for a moment and then vanished again in
the utter blackness. Fuselli pillowed his head in the crook of
someone's arm and tried to go to sleep, but the scraping rumble of
wheels over rails was too loud; he stayed with open eyes staring
into the blackness, trying to draw his body away from the blast of
cold air that blew up through a crack in the floor.

When the first greyness began filtering into the car, they all
stood up and stamped and pounded each other and wrestled to get
warm.

When it was nearly light, the train stopped and they opened the
sliding doors. They were in a station, a foreign-looking station
where the walls were plastered with unfamiliar advertisements. "V-
E-R-S-A-I-L-L-E-S"; Fuselli spelt out the name.

"Versales," said Eisenstein. "That's where the kings of France
used to live."

The train started moving again slowly. On the platform stood the
top sergeant.

"How d'ye sleep," he shouted as the car passed him. "Say, Fuselli,
better start some grub going."

"All right, Sarge," said Fuselli.

The sergeant ran back to the front of the car and climbed on.
With a delicious feeling of leadership, Fuselli divided up the
bread and the cans of bully beef and the cheese. Then he sat on
his pack eating dry bread and unsavoury beef, whistling joyfully,
while the train rumbled and clattered along through a strange,
misty-green countryside,--whistling joyfully because he was going
to the front, where there would be glory and excitement, whistling
joyfully because he felt he was getting along in the world.



It was noon. A pallid little sun like a toy balloon hung low in
the reddish-grey sky. The train had stopped on a siding in the
middle of a russet plain. Yellow poplars, faint as mist, rose
slender against the sky along a black shining stream that swirled
beside the track. In the distance a steeple and a few red roofs
were etched faintly in the greyness.

The men stood about balancing first on one foot and then on the
other, stamping to get warm. On the other side of the river an old
man with an oxcart had stopped and was looking sadly at the train.

"Say, where's the front?" somebody shouted to him.

Everybody took up the cry; "Say, where's the front?"

The old man waved his hand, shook his head and shouted to the
oxen. The oxen took up again their quiet processional gait and the
old man walked ahead of them, his eyes on the ground.

"Say, ain't the frogs dumb?"

"Say, Dan," said Bill Grey, strolling away from a group of men he
had been talking to. "These guys say we are going to the Third
Army."

"Say, fellers," shouted Fuselli. "They say we're going to the
Third Army."

"Where's that?"

"In the Oregon forest," ventured somebody.

"That's at the front, ain't it?"

At that moment the lieutenant strode by. A long khaki muffler was
thrown carelessly round his neck and hung down his back.

"Look here, men," he said severely, "the orders are to stay in the
cars."

The men slunk back into the cars sullenly.

A hospital train passed, clanking slowly over the cross-tracks.
Fuselli looked fixedly at the dark enigmatic windows, at the red
crosses, at the orderlies in white who leaned out of the doors,
waving their hands. Somebody noticed that there were scars on the
new green paint of the last car.

"The Huns have been shooting at it."

"D'ye hear that? The Huns tried to shoot up that hospital train."

Fuselli remembered the pamphlet "German Atrocities" he had read
one night in the Y. M. C. A. His mind became suddenly filled with
pictures of children with their arms cut off, of babies spitted on
bayonets, of women strapped on tables and violated by soldier
after soldier. He thought of Mabe. He wished he were in a
combatant service; he wanted to fight, fight. He pictured himself
shooting dozens of men in green uniforms, and he thought of Mabe
reading about it in the papers. He'd have to try to get into a
combatant service. No, he couldn't stay in the medics.

The train had started again. Misty russet fields slipped by and
dark clumps of trees that gyrated slowly waving branches of yellow
and brown leaves and patches of black lace-work against the
reddish-grey sky. Fuselli was thinking of the good chance he had
of getting to be corporal.



At night. A dim-lighted station platform. The company waited in
two lines, each man sitting on his pack. On the opposite platform
crowds of little men in blue with mustaches and long, soiled
overcoats that reached almost to their feet were shouting and
singing. Fuselli watched them with a faint disgust.

"Gee, they got funny lookin' helmets, ain't they?"

"They're the best fighters in the world," said Eisenstein, "not
that that's sayin' much about a man."

"Say, that's an M. P.," said Bill Grey, catching Fuselli's
arm. "Let's go ask him how near the front we are. I
thought I heard guns a minute ago."

"Did you? I guess we're in for it now," said Fuselli. "Say, buddy,
how near the front are we?" they spoke together excitedly.

"The front?" said the M. P., who was a red-faced Irishman with a
crushed nose. "You're 'way back in the middle of France." The M.
P. spat disgustedly. "You fellers ain't never goin' to the front,
don't you worry."

"Hell!" said Fuselli.

"I'll be goddamned if I don't get there somehow," said Bill Grey,
squaring his jaw.

A fine rain was falling on the unprotected platform. On the other
side the little men in blue were singing a song Fuselli could not
understand, drinking out of their ungainly-looking canteens.

Fuselli announced the news to the company. Everybody clustered
round him cursing. But the faint sense of importance it gave him
did not compensate for the feeling he had of being lost in the
machine, of being as helpless as a sheep in a flock. Hours passed.
They stamped about the platform in the fine rain or sat in a row
on their packs, waiting for orders. A grey belt appeared behind
the trees. The platform began to take on a silvery gleam. They sat
in a row on their packs, waiting.



                             II

The company stood at attention lined up outside of their barracks,
a long wooden shack covered with tar paper, in front of them was a
row of dishevelled plane trees with white trunks that looked like
ivory in the faint ruddy sunlight. Then there was a rutted road on
which stood a long line of French motor trucks with hunched grey
backs like elephants. Beyond these were more plane trees and an-
other row of barracks covered with tar paper, outside of which
other companies were lined up standing at attention.

A bugle was sounding far away.

The lieutenant stood at attention very stiffly. Fuselli's eyes
followed the curves of his brilliantly-polished puttees up to the
braid on his sleeves.

"Parade rest!" shouted the lieutenant in a muffled voice.

Feet and hands moved in unison.

Fuselli was thinking of the town. After retreat you could go down
the irregular cobbled street from the old fair-ground where the
camp was to a little square where there was a grey stone fountain
and a gin-mill where you could sit at an oak table and have beer
and eggs and fried potatoes served you by a girl with red cheeks
and plump white appetizing arms.

"Attention!"

Feet and hands moved in unison again. They could hardly hear the
bugle, it was so faint.

"Men, I have some appointments to announce, said the lieutenant,
facing the company and taking on an easy conversational tone.
"At rest!...  You've done good work in the storehouse here, men.
I'm glad I have such a willing bunch of men under me. And I
certainly hope that we can manage to make as many promotions
as possible--as many as possible."

Fuselli's hands were icy, and his heart was pumping the blood so
fast to his ears that he could hardly hear.

"The following privates to private first-class, read the
lieutenant in a routine voice: "Grey, Appleton, Williams,
Eisenstein, Porter...Eisenstein will be company clerk.... "
Fuselli was almost ready to cry. His name was not on the list.
The sergeant's voice came after a long pause, smooth as velvet.

"You forget Fuselli, sir."

"Oh, so I did," the lieutenant laughed--a small dry laugh. --"And Fuselli."

"Gee, I must write Mabe tonight," Fuselli was saying to himself.
"She'll be a proud kid when she gets that letter."

"Companee dis...missed!", shouted the sergeant genially.

"O Madermoiselle from Armenteers,
      Parley voo?
 O Madermoiselle from Armenteers,

struck up the sergeant in his mellow voice.

The front room of the cafe was full of soldiers. Their khaki hid
the worn oak benches and the edges of the square tables and the
red tiles of the floor. They clustered round the tables, where
glasses and bottles  gleamed vaguely through the tobacco smoke.
They stood in front of the bar, drinking out of bottles, laughing,
scraping their feet on the floor. A stout girl with red cheeks and
plump white arms moved contentedly among them, carrying away empty
bottles, bringing back full ones, taking the money to a grim old
woman with a grey face and eyes like bits of jet, who stared
carefully at each coin, fingered it with her grey hands and
dropped it reluctantly into the cash drawer. In the corner sat
Sergeant Olster with a flush on his face, and the corporal who had
been on the Red Sox outfield and another sergeant, a big man with
black hair and a black mustache. About them clustered, with
approbation and respect in their faces, Fuselli, Bill Grey and
Meadville the cowboy, and Earl Williams, the blue-eyed and yellow-
haired drug-clerk.

"O the Yanks are having the hell of a time,
     Parley voo?"

They pounded their bottles on the table in time to the song.

"It's a good job," the top sergeant said, suddenly interrupting
the song. "You needn't worry about that, fellers. I saw to it that
we got a good job.... And about getting to the front, you needn't
worry about that. We'll all get to the front soon enough.... Tell
me--this war is going to last ten years."

"I guess we'll all be generals by that time, eh, Sarge?" said
Williams. "But, man, I wish I was back jerkin' soda water."

"It's a great life if you don't weaken," murmured Fuselli
automatically.

"But I'm beginnin' to weaken," said Williams. "Man, I'm homesick.
I don't care who knows it. I wish I could get to the front and be
done with it,"

"Say, have a heart. You need a drink," said the top sergeant,
banging his fist on the table. "Say, mamselle, mame shows, mame
shows!"

"I didn't know you could talk French, Sarge," said Fuselli.

"French, hell!" said the top sergeant. "Williams is the boy can
talk French."

"Voulay vous couchay aveck moy.... That's all I know."

Everybody laughed.

"Hey, mamzelle," cried the top sergeant. "Voulay vous couchay
aveck moy? We We, champagne." Everybody laughed, uproariously.

The girl slapped his head good-naturedly.

At that moment a man stamped noisily into the cafe, a tall broad-
shouldered man in a loose English tunic, who had a swinging
swagger that made the glasses ring on all the tables. He was
humming under his breath and there was a grin on his broad red
face. He went up to the girl and pretended to kiss her, and she
laughed and talked familiarly with him in French.

"There's wild Dan Cohan," said the dark-haired sergeant. "Say,
Dan, Dan."

"Here, yer honor."

"Come over and have a drink. We're going to have some fizzy."

"Never known to refuse."

They made room for him on the bench.

"Well, I'm confined to barracks," said Dan Cohan. "Look at me!" He
laughed and gave his head a curious swift jerk to one side.
"Compree?"

"Ain't ye scared they'll nab you?" said Fuselli.

"Nab me, hell, they can't do nothin' to me. I've had three court-
martials already and they're gettin' a fourth up on me."

Dan Cohan pushed his head to one side and laughed. "I got a
friend. My old boss is captain, and he's goin' to fix it up. I
used to alley around politics chez moy. Compree?"

The champagne came and Dan Cohan popped the cork up to the ceiling
with dexterous red fingers.

"I was just wondering who was going to give me a drink," he said.
"Ain't had any pay since Christ was a corporal. I've forgotten
what it looks like."

The champagne fizzed into the beer-glasses.

"This is the life," said Fuselli.

"Ye're damn right, buddy, if yer don't let them ride yer," said
Dan.

"What they got yer up for now, Dan?"

"Murder."

"Murder, hell! How's that?"

"That is, if that bloke dies."

"The hell you say!"

"It all started by that goddam convoy down from Nantes...Bill Rees
an' me.... They called us the shock troops.--Hy! Marie! Ancore
champagne, beaucoup.--I was in the Ambulance service then. God
knows what rotten service I'm in now.... Our section was on repo
and they sent some of us fellers down to Nantes to fetch a convoy
of cars back to Sandrecourt. We started out like regular racers,
just the chassis, savey? Bill Rees an' me was the goddam tail of
the peerade. An' the loot was a hell of a blockhead that didn't
know if he was coming or going."

"Where the hell's Nantes?" asked the top sergeant, as if it had
just slipped his mind.

"On the coast," answered Fuselli. "I seen it on the map."

"Nantes's way off to hell and gone anyway," said wild Dan Cohan,
taking a gulp of champagne that he held in his mouth a moment,
making his mouth move like a cow ruminating.

"An' as Bill Rees an' me was the tail of the peerade an' there was
lots of cafes and little gin-mills, Bill Rees an' me'd stop off
every now and then to have a little drink an' say 'Bonjour' to the
girls an' talk to the people, an' then we'd go like a bat out of
hell to catch up. Well, I don't know if we went too fast for 'em
or if they lost the road or what, but we never saw that goddam
convoy from the time we went out of Nantes. Then we thought we
might as well see a bit of the country, compree?...    An' we did,
goddam it.... We landed up in Orleans, soused to the gills and
without any gas an' with an M. P; climbing up on the dashboard."

"Did they nab you, then?"

"Not a bit of it," said wild Dan Cohen, jerking his head to one
side. "They gave us gas and commutation of rations an' told us to
go on in the mornin'. You see we put up a good line of talk,
compree?...   Well, we went to the swankiest restaurant.... You
see we had on those bloody British uniforms they gave us when the
O. D. gave out, an' the M. P.'s didn't know just what sort o'
birds we were. So we went and ordered up a regular meal an' lots
o' vin rouge an' vin blank an' drank a few cognacs an' before we
knew it we were eating dinner with two captains and a sergeant.
One o' the captains was the drunkest man I ever did see.... Good
kid! We all had dinner and Bill Rees says, 'Let's go for a joy-
ride.' An' the captains says, 'Fine,' and the sergeant would have
said, 'Fine,' but he was so goggle-eyed drunk he couldn't. An' we
started off!...  Say, fellers, I'm dry as hell! Let's order up
another bottle."

"Sure," said everyone.

"Ban swar, ma cherie,
 Comment allez vous?"

"Encore champagne, Marie, gentille!"

"Well," he went on, "we went like a bat out of hell along a good
state road, and it was all fine until one of the captains thought
we ought to have a race. We did.... Compree? The flivvers flivved
all right, but the hell of it was we got so excited about the race
we forgot about the sergeant an' he fell off an' nobody missed
him. An' at last we all pull up before a gin-mill an' one captain
says, 'Where's the sergeant?' an' the other captain says there
hadn't been no sergeant. An' we all had a drink on that. An' one
captain kept sayin', 'It's all imagination. Never was a sergeant.
I wouldn't associate with a sergeant, would I, lootenant?' He kept
on calling me lootenant.... Well that was how they got this new
charge against me. Somebody picked up the sergeant an' he got
concussion o' the brain an' there's hell to pay, an' if the poor
buggar croaks.... I'm it.... Compree? About that time the captains
start wantin' to go to Paris, an' we said we'd take 'em, an' so we
put all the gas in my car an' the four of us climbed on that
goddam chassis an' off we went like a bat out of hell! It'ld all
have been fine if I wasn't lookin' cross-eyed.... We piled up in
about two minutes on one of those nice little stone piles an'
there we were. We all got up an' one o' the captains had his arm
broke, an' there was hell to pay, worse than losing the sergeant.
So we walked on down the road. I don't know how it got to be
daylight. But we got to some hell of a town or other an' there was
two M. P.'s all ready to meet us.... Compree?...  Well, we didn't
mess around with them captains. We just lit off down a side street
an' got into a little cafe an' went in back an' had a hell of a
lot o' cafe o' lay. That made us feel sort o' good an' I says to
Bill, 'Bill, we've got to get to headquarters an' tell 'em that we
accidentally smashed up our car, before the M. P.'s get busy.' An'
he says, 'You're goddamned right,' an' at that minute I sees an M.
P. through a crack in the door comin' into the cafe. We lit out
into the garden and made for the wall. We got over that, although
we left a good piece of my pants in the broken glass. But the hell
of it was the M. P.'s got over too an' they had their pop-guns
out. An' the last I saw of Bill Rees was--there was a big fat
woman in a pink dress washing clothes in a big tub, an' poor ole
Bill Rees runs head on into her an' over they both goes into the
washtub. The M. P.'s got him all right. That's how I got away. An'
the last I saw of Bill Rees he was squirming about on top of the
washtub like he was swimmin', an' the fat woman was sittin' on the
ground shaking her fist at him. Bill Rees was the best buddy I
ever had."

He paused and poured the rest of the champagne in his glass and
wiped the sweat off his face with his big red hand.

"You ain't stringin' us, are you?" asked Fuselli.

"You just ask Lieutenant Whitehead, who's defending me in the
court-martial, if I'm stringin' yer. I been in the ring, kid, and
you can bet your bottom dollar that a man's been in the ring'll
tell the truth."

"Go on, Dan," said the sergeant.

"An' I never heard a word about Bill Rees since. I guess they got
him into the trenches and made short work of him."

Dan Cohan paused to light a cigarette.

"Well, one o' the M. P.'s follows after me and starts shootin'.
An' don't you believe I ran. Gee, I was scared! But I was in luck
'cause a Frenchman had just started his camion an' I jumped in and
said the gendarmes were after me. He was white, that frog was. He
shot the juice into her an' went off like a bat out of hell an'
there was a hell of a lot of traffic on the road because there was
some damn-fool attack or other goin' on. So I got up to Paris....
An' then it'ld all have been fine if I hadn't met up with a Jane I
knew. I still had five hundred francs on me, an' so we raised hell
until one day we was havin' dinner in the cafe de Paris, both of
us sort of jagged up, an' we didn't have enough money to pay the
bill an' Janey made a run for it, but an M. P. got me an' then
there was hell to pay.... Compree? They put me in the Bastille,
great place.... Then they shipped me off to some damn camp or
other an' gave me a gun an' made me drill for a week an' then they
packed a whole gang of us, all A. W. O. L's, into a train for the
front. That was nearly the end of little Daniel again. But when we
was in Vitry-le-Francois, I chucked my rifle out of one window and
jumped out of the other an' got on a train back to Paris an' went
an' reported to headquarters how I'd smashed the car an' been in
the Bastille an' all, an' they were sore as hell at the M. P.'s
an' sent me out to a section an' all went fine until I got ordered
back an' had to alley down to this goddam camp. Ah' now I don't
know what they're goin' to do to me."

"Gee whiz!"

"It's a great war, I tell you, Sarge. It's a great war. I wouldn't
have missed it."

Across the room someone was singing.

"Let's drown 'em out," said the top sergeant boisterously.

"O Mademerselle from Armenteers,
 Parley voo?"

"Well, I've got to get the hell out of here," said wild Dan Cohan,
after a minute. "I've got a Jane waitin' for me. I'm all fixed
up,... Compree?"

He swaggered out singing:

"Bon soir, ma cherie,
 Comment alley vous?
 Si vous voulez
 Couche avec moi...."

The door slammed behind him, leaving the cafe quiet.

Many men had left. Madame had taken up her knitting and Marie of
the plump white arms sat beside her, leaning her head back among
the bottles that rose in tiers behind the bars.

Fuselli was staring at a door on one side of the bar. Men kept
opening it and looking in and closing it again with a peculiar
expression on their faces. Now and then someone would open it with
a smile and go into the next room, shuffling his feet and closing
the door carefully behind him.

"Say, I wonder what they've got there," said the top sergeant, who
had been staring at the door. "Mush be looked into, mush be looked
into," he added, laughing drunkenly.

"I dunno," said Fuselli. The champagne was humming in his head
like a fly against a window pane. He felt very bold and important.

The top sergeant got to his feet unsteadily.

"Corporal, take charge of the colors," he said, and walked to the
door. He opened it a little, peeked in; winked elaborately to his
friends and skipped into the other room, closing the door
carefully behind him.

The corporal went over next. He said, "Well, I'll be damned," and
walked straight in, leaving the door ajar. In a moment it was
closed from the inside.

"Come on, Bill, let's see what the hell they got in there," said
Fuselli.

"All right, old kid," said Bill Grey. They went together over to
the door. Fuselli opened it and looked in. He let out a breath
through his teeth with a faint whistling sound.

"Gee, come in, Bill," he said, giggling.

The room was small, nearly filled up by a dining table with a red
cloth. On the mantel above the empty fireplace were candlesticks
with dangling crystals that glittered red and yellow and purple in
the lamplight, in front of a cracked mirror that seemed a window
into another dingier room. The paper was peeling off the damp
walls, giving a mortuary smell of mildewed plaster that not even
the reek of beer and tobacco had done away with.

"Look at her, Bill, ain't she got style?" whispered Fuselli.

Bill Grey grunted.

"Say, d'ye think the Jane that feller was tellin' us he raised
hell with in Paris was like that?"

At the end of the table, leaning on her elbows, was a woman with
black frizzy hair cut short, that stuck out from her head in all
directions. Her eyes were dark and her lips red with a faint
swollen look. She looked with a certain defiance at the men who
stood about the walls and sat at the table.

The men stared at her silently. A big man with red hair and a
heavy jaw who sat next her kept edging up nearer. Someone knocked
against the table making the bottles and liqueur glasses clustered
in the center jingle.

"She ain't clean; she's got bobbed hair," said the man next
Fuselli.

The woman said something in French.

Only one man understood it. His laugh rang hollowly in the silent
room and stopped suddenly.

The woman looked attentively at the faces round her for a moment,
shrugged her shoulders, and began straightening the ribbon on the
hat she held on her lap.

"How the hell did she get here? I thought the M. P.'s ran them out
of town the minute they got here," said one man.

The woman continued plucking at her hat.

"You venay Paris?" said a boy with a soft voice who sat near her.
He had blue eyes and a milky complexion, faintly tanned, that went
strangely with the rough red and brown faces in the room.

"Oui; de Paris," she said after a pause, glancing suddenly in the
boy's face.

"She's a liar, I can tell you that," said the red-haired man, who
by this time had moved his chair very close to the woman's.

"You told him you came from Marseilles, and him you came from
Lyon," said the boy with the milky complexion, smiling genially.
"Vraiment de ou venay vous?"

"I come from everywhere," she said, and tossed the hair back from
her face.

"Travelled a lot?" asked the boy again.

"A feller told me," said Fuselli to Bill Grey, "that he'd talked
to a girl like that who'd been to Turkey an' Egypt I bet that
girl's seen some life."

The woman jumped to her feet suddenly screaming with rage. The man
with the red hair moved away sheepishly. Then he lifted his large
dirty hands in the air.

"Kamarad," he said.

Nobody laughed. The room was silent except for feet scraping
occasionally on the floor.

She put her hat on and took a little box from the chain bag in her
lap and began powdering her face, making faces into the mirror she
held in the palm of her hand.

The men stared at her.

"Guess she thinks she's the Queen of the May," said one man,
getting to his feet. He leaned across the table and spat into the
fireplace. "I'm going back to barracks." He turned to the woman
and shouted in a voice full of hatred, "Bon swar."

The woman was putting the powder puff away in her jet bag. She did
not look up; the door closed sharply.

"Come along," said the woman, suddenly, tossing her head back.
"Come along one at a time; who go with me first?"

Nobody spoke. The men stared at her silently. There was no sound
except that of feet scraping occasionally on the floor.



                              III

The oatmeal flopped heavily into the mess-kit. Fuselli's eyes were
still glued together with sleep. He sat at the dark greasy bench
and took a gulp of the scalding coffee that smelt vaguely of dish
rags. That woke him up a little. There was little talk in the mess
shack. The men, that the bugle had wrenched out of their blankets
but fifteen minutes before, sat in rows, eating sullenly or
blinking at each other through the misty darkness. You could hear
feet scraping in the ashes of the floor and mess kits clattering
against the tables and here and there a man coughing. Near the
counter where the food was served out one of the cooks swore
interminably in a whiny sing-sing voice.

"Gee, Bill, I've got a head," said Fuselli.

"Ye're ought to have," growled Bill Grey. "I had to carry you up
into the barracks. You said you were goin' back and love up that
goddam girl."

"Did I?" said Fuselli, giggling.

"I had a hell of a time getting you past the guard."

"Some cognac!... I got a hangover now," said Fuselli.

"I'm goddamned if I can go this much longer."

"What?"

They were washing their mess-kits in the tub of warm water thick
with grease from the hundred mess-kits that had gone before, in
front of the shack. An electric light illumined faintly the wet
trunk of a plane tree and the surface of the water where bits of
oatmeal floated and coffee grounds,--and the garbage pails with
their painted signs: WET GARBAGE, DRY GARBAGE; and the line of men who
stood waiting to reach the tub.

"This hell of a life!" said Bill Grey, savagely.

"What d'ye mean?"

"Doin' nothin' but pack bandages in packin' cases and take
bandages out of packin' cases. I'll go crazy. I've tried gettin'
drunk; it don't do no good."

"Gee; I've got a head," said Fuselli.

Bill Grey put his heavy muscular hand round Fuselli's shoulder as
they strolled towards the barracks.

"Say, Dan, I'm goin' A. W. O. L."

"Don't ye do it, Bill. Hell, look at the chance we've got to get
ahead. We can both of us get promoted if we don't get in wrong."

"I don't give a hoot in hell for all that.... What d'ye think I
got in this goddamed army for? Because I thought I'd look nice in
the uniform?"

Bill Grey thrust his hands into his pockets and spat dismally in
front of him.

"But, Bill, you don't want to stay a buck private, do you?"

"I want to get to the front.... I don't want to stay here till I
get in the jug for being spiffed or get a court-martial.... Say,
Dan, will you come with me?"

"Hell, Bill, you ain't goin'. You're just kiddin', ain't yer?
They'll send us there soon enough. I want to get to be a
corporal,"--he puffed out his chest a little--"before I go to the
front, so's to be able to show what I'm good for. See, Bill?"

A bugle blew.

"There's fatigue, an' I ain't done my bunk."

"Me neither.... They won't do nothin', Dan.... Don't let them ride
yer, Dan."

They lined up in the dark road feeling the mud slopping under
their feet. The ruts were full of black water, in which gleamed a
reflection of distant electric lights.

"All you fellows work in Storehouse A today," said the sergeant,
who had been a preacher, in his sad, drawling voice. "Lieutenant
says that's all got to be finished by noon. They're sending it to
the front today."

Somebody let his breath out in a whistle of surprise.

"Who did that?"

Nobody answered.

"Dismissed!" snapped the sergeant disgustedly.

They straggled off into the darkness towards one of the lights,
their feet splashing confusedly in the puddles.

Fuselli strolled up to the sentry at the camp gate. He was picking
his teeth meditatively with the splinter of a pine board.

"Say, Phil, you couldn't lend me a half a dollar, could you?"
Fuselli stopped, put his hands in his pockets and looked at the
sentry with the splinter sticking out of a corner of his mouth.

"Sorry, Dan," said the other man; "I'm cleaned out. Ain't had a
cent since New Year's."

"Why the hell don't they pay us?"

"You guys signed the pay roll yet?"

"Sure. So long!"



Fuselli strolled on down the dark road, where the mud was frozen
into deep ruts, towards the town. It was still strange to him,
this town of little houses faced with cracked stucco, where the
damp made grey stains and green stains, of confused red-tiled
roofs, and of narrow cobbled streets that zigzagged in and out
among high walls overhung with balconies. At night, when it was
dark except for where a lamp in a window spilt gold reflections
out on the wet street or the light streamed out from a store or a
cafe, it was almost frighteningly unreal. He walked down into the
main square, where he could hear the fountain gurgling. In the
middle he stopped indecisively, his coat unbuttoned, his hands
pushed to the bottom of his trousers pockets, where they
encountered nothing but the cloth. He listened a long time to the
gurgling of the fountain and to the shunting of trains far away in
the  freight yards.  "An' this is the  war,"  he thought. "Ain't
it queer? It's quieter than it was at home nights." Down the
street at the end of the square a band of white light appeared,
the searchlight of a staff car. The two eyes of the car stared
straight into his eyes, dazzling him, then veered off to one side
and whizzed past, leaving a faint smell of gasoline and a sound of
voices. Fuselli watched the fronts of houses light up as the car
made its way to the main road. Then the town was dark and silent
again.

He strolled across the square towards the Cheval Blanc, the large
cafe where the officers went.

"Button yer coat," came a gruff voice. He saw a stiff tall figure
at the edge of the curve. He made out the shape of the pistol
holster that hung like a thin ham at the man's thigh. An M. P. He
buttoned his coat hurriedly and walked off with rapid steps.

He stopped outside a cafe that had "Ham and Eggs" written in white
paint on the window and looked in wistfully. Someone from behind
him put two big hands over his eyes. He wriggled his head free.

"Hello, Dan," he said. "How did you get out of the jug?"

"I'm a trusty, kid," said Dan Cohan. "Got any dough?"

"Not a damn cent!"

"Me neither.... Come on in anyway," said Cohan. "I'll fix it up
with Marie." Fuselli followed doubtfully. He was a little afraid
of Dan Cohan; he remembered how a man had been court-martialed
last week for trying to bolt out of a cafe without paying for his
drinks.

He sat down at a table near the door. Dan had disappeared into the
back room. Fuselli felt homesick. He was thinking how long it was
since, he had had a letter from Mabe. "I bet she's got another
feller," he told himself savagely. He tried to remember how she
looked, but he had to take out his watch and peep in the back
before he could make out if her nose were straight or snub. He
looked up, clicking the watch in his pocket. Marie of the white
arms was coming laughing out of the inner room. Her large firm
breasts, neatly held in by the close-fitting blouse, shook a
little when she laughed. Her cheeks were very red and a strand of
chestnut hair hung down along her neck. She picked it up hurriedly
and caught it up with a hairpin, walking slowly into the middle of
the room as she did so with her hands behind her head. Dan Cohan
followed her into the room, a broad grin on his face.

"All right, kid," he said. "I told her you'ld pay when Uncle Sam
came across. Ever had any Kummel?"

"What the hell's that?"

"You'll see."

They sat down before a dish of fried eggs at the table in the
corner, the favoured table, where Marie herself often sat and
chatted, when wizened Madame did not have her eye upon her.

Several men drew up their chairs. Wild Dan Cohan always had an
audience.

"Looks like there was going to be another offensive at Verdun,"
said Dan Cohan. Someone answered vaguely.

"Funny how little we know about what's going on out there," said
one man. "I knew more about the war when I was home in Minneapolis
than I do here,"

"I guess we're lightin' into 'em all right," said Fuselli in a
patriotic voice.

"Hell! Nothin' doin' this time o' year anyway," said Cohan. A grin
spread across his red face. "Last time I was at the front the
Boche had just made a coup de main and captured a whole
trenchful."

"Of who?"

"Of Americans--of us!"

"The hell you say!"

"That's a goddam lie," shouted a black-haired man with an ill-
shaven jaw, who had just come in. "There ain't never been an
American captured, an' there never will be, by God!"

"How long were you at the front, buddy," asked Cohan coolly. "I
guess you been to Berlin already, ain't yer?"

"I say that any man who says an American'ld let himself be
captured by a stinkin' Hun, is a goddam liar," said the man with
the ill-shaven jaw, sitting down sullenly.

"Well, you'd better not say it to me," said Cohan laughing,
looking meditatively at one of his big red fists.

There had been a look of apprehension on Marie's face. She looked
at Cohan's fist and shrugged her shoulders and laughed.

Another crowd had just slouched into the cafe.

"Well if that isn't wild Dan! Hello, old kid, how are you?"

"Hello, Dook!"

A small man in a coat that looked almost like an officer's coat,
it was so well cut, was shaking hands effusively with Cohan. He
wore a corporal's stripes and a British aviator's fatigue cap.
Cohan made room for him on the bench.

"What are you doing in this hole, Dook?" The man twisted his mouth
so that his neat black mustache was a slant.

"G. O. 42," he said.

"Battle of Paris?" said Cohan in a sympathetic voice. "Battle of
Nice! I'm going back to my section soon. I'd never have got a
court-martial if I'd been with my outfit. I was in the Base
Hospital 15 with pneumonia."

"Tough luck!"

"It was a hell of a note."

"Say, Dook, your outfit was  working with ours at Chamfort that
time, wasn't it?"

"You mean when we evacuated the nut hospital?"

"Yes, wasn't that hell?" Dan Cohan gulped down half a glass of red
wine, smacked his thick lips, and began in his story-telling
voice:

"Our section had just come out of Verdun where we'd been getting
hell for three weeks on the Bras road. There was one little hill
where we'd have to get out and shove every damn time, the mud was
so deep, and God, it stank there with the shells turning up the
ground all full of mackabbies as the poilus call them.... Say,
Dook, have you got any money?"

"I've got some," said Dook, without enthusiasm.

"Well, the champagne's damn good here. I'm part of the outfit in
this gin mill; they'll give it to you at a reduction."

"All right!"

Dan Cohan turned round and whispered something to Marie. She
laughed and dived down behind the curtain.

"But that Chamfort was worse yet. Everybody was sort o' nervous
because the Germans had dropped a message sayin' they'd give 'em
three days to clear the hospital out, and that then they'd shell
hell out of the place."

"The Germans done that! Quit yer kiddin'," said Fuselli.

"They did it at Souilly, too," said Dook. "Hell, yes.... A funny
thing happened there. The hospital was in a big rambling house,
looked like an Atlantic City hotel.... We used to run our car in
back and sleep in it. It was where we took the shell-shock cases,
fellows who were roarin' mad, and tremblin' all over, and some of
'em paralysed like.... There was a man in the wing opposite where
we slept who kept laugh-in'. Bill Rees was on the car with me, and
we laid in our blankets in the bottom of the car and every now and
then one of us'ld turn over and whisper: 'Ain't this hell, kid?'
'cause that feller kept laughin' like a man who had just heard a
joke that was so funny he couldn't stop laughin'. It wasn't like a
crazy man's laugh usually is. When I first heard it I thought it
was a man really laughin', and I guess I laughed too. But it
didn't stop.... Bill Rees an' me laid in our car shiverin',
listenin' to the barrage in the distance with now and then the big
noise of an aeroplane bomb, an' that feller laughin', laughin',
like he'd  just heard a joke, like something had struck him
funny." Cohan took a gulp of champagne and jerked his head to one
side. "An that damn laughin' kept up until about noon the next day
when the orderlies strangled the feller.... Got their goat, I
guess."

Fuselli was looking towards the other side of the room, where a
faint murmur of righteous indignation was rising from the dark man
with the unshaven jaw and his companions. Fuselli was thinking
that it wasn't good to be seen round too much with a fellow like
Cohan, who talked about the Germans notifying hospitals before
they bombarded them and who was waiting for a court-martial. Might
get him in wrong. He slipped out of the cafe into the dark. A dank
wind blew down the irregular street, ruffling the reflected light
in the puddles, making a shutter bang interminably somewhere.
Fuselli  went to the main square again, casting an envious glance
in the window of the Cheval Blanc, where he saw officers playing
billiards in a well-lighted room painted white and gold, and a
blond girl in a raspberry-colored shirtwaist enthroned haughtily
behind the bar. He remembered the M. P. and automatically hastened
his steps. In a narrow street the other side of the square he
stopped before the window of a small grocery shop and peered
inside, keeping carefully out of the oblong of light that showed
faintly the grass-grown cobbles and the green and grey walls
opposite. A girl sat knitting beside the small counter with her
two little black feet placed demurely side by side on the edge of
a box full of red beets. She was very small and slender. The
lamplight gleamed on her black hair, done close to her head. Her
face was in the shadow. Several soldiers lounged awkwardly against
the counter and the jambs of the door, following her movements
with their eyes as dogs watch a plate of meat being moved about in
a kitchen.

After a little the girl rolled up her knitting and jumped to her
feet, showing her face,--an oval white face with large dark lashes
and an impertinent mouth. She stood looking at the soldiers who
stood about her in a circle, then twisted up her mouth in a
grimace and disappeared into the inner room.

Fuselli walked to the end of the street where there was a bridge
over a small stream. He leaned on the cold stone rail and looked
into the water that was barely visible gurgling beneath between
rims of ice.

"O this is a hell of a life," he muttered.

He shivered in the cold wind but remained leaning over the water.
In the distance trains rumbled interminably, giving him a sense of
vast desolate distances. The village clock struck eight. The bell
had a soft note like the bass string of a guitar. In the darkness
Fuselli could almost see the girl's face grimacing with its broad
impertinent lips. He thought of the sombre barracks and men
sitting about on the end of their cots. Hell, he couldn't go back
yet. His whole body was taut with desire for warmth and softness
and quiet. He slouched back along the narrow street cursing in a
dismal monotone. Before the grocery store he stopped. The men had
gone. He went in jauntily pushing his cap a little to one side so
that some of his thick curly hair came out over his forehead. The
little bell in the door clanged.

The girl came out of the inner room. She gave him her hand
indifferently.

"Comment ca va! Yvonne? Bon?"

His pidgin-French made her show her little pearly teeth in a
smile.

"Good," she said in English.

They laughed childishly.

"Say, will you be my girl, Yvonne?"

She looked in his eyes and laughed.

"Non compris," she said.

"We, we; voulez vous et' ma fille?"

She shrieked with laughter and slapped him hard on the cheek.
"Venez," she said, still laughing. He followed her. In the inner
room was a large oak table with chairs round it. At the end
Eisenstein and a French soldier were talking excitedly, so
absorbed in what they were saying that they did not notice the
other two. Yvonne took the Frenchman by the hair and pulled his
head back and told him, still laughing, what Fuselli had said. He
laughed.

"No, you must not say that," he said in English, turning to
Fuselli.

Fuselli was angry and sat down sullenly at the end of the table,
keeping his eyes on Yvonne. She drew the knitting out of the
pocket of her apron and holding it up comically between two
fingers, glanced towards the dark corner of the room where an old
woman with a lace cap on her head sat asleep, and then let herself
fall into a chair.

"Boom!" she said.

Fuselli laughed until the tears filled his eyes. She laughed too.
They sat a long while looking at each other and giggling, while
Eisenstein and the Frenchman talked. Suddenly Fuselli caught a
phrase that startled him.

"What would you Americans do if revolution broke out in France?"

"We'd do what we were ordered to," said Eisenstein bitterly.
"We're a bunch of slaves." Fuselli noticed that Eisenstein's puffy
sallow face was flushed and that there was a flash in his eyes he
had never seen before.

"How do you mean, revolution?" asked Fuselli in a puzzled voice.

The Frenchman turned black eyes searchingly upon him.

"I mean, stop the butchery,--overthrow the capitalist government.
--The social revolution."

"But you're a republic already, ain't yer?"

"As much as you are."

"You talk like a socialist," said Fuselli. "They tell me they
shoot guys in America for talkin' like that."

"You see!" said Eisenstein to the Frenchman.

"Are they all like that?"

"Except a very few. It's hopeless," said Eisenstein, burying his
face in his hands. "I often think of shooting myself."

"Better shoot someone else," said the Frenchman. "It will be more
useful."

Fuselli stirred uneasily in his chair.

"Where'd you fellers get that stuff anyway?" he asked. In his mind
he was saying: "A kike and a frog, that's a good combination."

His eye caught Yvonne's and they both laughed, Yvonne threw her
knitting ball at him. It rolled down under the table and they both
scrambled about under the chairs looking for it.

"Twice I have thought it was going to happen," said the Frenchman.

"When was that?"

"A little while ago a division started marching on Paris.... And
when I was in Verdun.... O there will be a revolution.... France
is the country of revolutions."

"We'll always be here to shoot you down," said Eisenstein.

"Wait till you've been in the war a little while. A winter in the
trenches will make any army ready for revolution."

"But we have no way of learning the truth. And in the tyranny of
the army a man becomes a brute, a piece of machinery. Remember you
are freer than we are. We are worse than the Russians!"

"It is curious!... O but you must have some feeling of
civilization. I have always heard that Americans were free and
independent. Will they let themselves be driven to the slaughter
always?"

"O I don't know." Eisenstein got to his feet. "We'd better be
getting to barracks. Coming, Fuselli?" he said.

"Guess so," said Fuselli indifferently, without getting up.

Eisenstein and the Frenchman went out into the shop.

"Bon swar," said Fuselli, softly, leaning across the table.
"Hey, girlie?"

He threw himself on his belly on the wide table and put his arms
round her neck and kissed her, feeling everything go blank in a
flame of desire.

She pushed him away calmly with strong little arms.

"Stop!" she said, and jerked her head in the direction of the old
woman in the chair in the dark corner of the room. They stood side
by side listening to her faint wheezy snoring. He put his arms
round her and kissed her long on the mouth.

"Demain," he said.

She nodded her head.

Fuselli walked fast up the dark street towards the camp. The blood
pounded happily through his veins. He caught up with Eisenstein.

"Say, Eisenstein," he said in a comradely voice, "I don't think
you ought to go talking round like that. You'll get yourself in
too deep one of these days."

"I don't care!"

"But, hell, man, you don't want to get in the wrong that bad. They
shoot fellers for less than you said."

"Let them."

"Christ, man, you don't want to be a damn fool," expostulated
Fuselli.

"How old are you, Fuselli?"

"I'm twenty now."

"I'm thirty. I've lived more, kid. I know what's good and what's
bad. This butchery makes me unhappy."

"God, I know. It's a hell of a note. But who brought it on? If
somebody had shot that Kaiser."

Eisenstein laughed bitterly. At the entrance of camp Fuselli
lingered a moment watching the small form of Eisenstein disappear
with its curious waddly walk into the darkness.

"I'm going to be damn careful who I'm seen goin' into barracks
with," he said to himself. "That damn kike may be a German spy or
a secret-service officer." A cold chill of terror went over him,
shattering his mood of joyous self-satisfaction. His feet slopped
in the puddles, breaking through the thin ice, as he walked up the
road towards the barracks. He felt as if people were watching him
from everywhere out of the darkness, as if some gigantic figure
were driving him forward through the darkness, holding a fist over
his head, ready to crush him.

When he was rolled up in his blankets in the bunk next to Bill
Grey, he whispered to his friend:

"Say, Bill, I think I've got a skirt all fixed up in town."

"Who?"

"Yvonne--don't tell anybody."

Bill Grey whistled softly.

"You're some highflyer, Dan."

Fuselli chuckled.

"Hell, man, the best ain't good enough for me."

"Well, I'm going to leave you," said Bill Grey.

"When?"

"Damn soon. I can't go this life. I don't see how you can."

Fuselli did not answer. He snuggled warmly into his blankets,
thinking of Yvonne and the corporalship.



In the light of the one flickering lamp that made an unsteady
circle of reddish glow on the station platform Fuselli looked at
his pass. From Reveille on February fourth to Reveille on February
fifth he was a free man. His eyes smarted with sleep as he walked
up and down the cold station platform. For twenty-four hours he
wouldn't have to obey anybody's orders. Despite the loneliness of
going away on a train in a night like this in a strange country
Fuselli was happy. He clinked the money in his pocket.

Down the track a red eye appeared and grew nearer. He could hear
the hard puffing of the engine up the grade. Huge curves gleamed
as the engine roared slowly past him. A man with bare arms black
with coal dust was leaning out of the cab, lit up from behind by a
yellowish red glare. Now the cars were going by, flat cars with
guns, tilted up like the muzzles of hunting dogs, freight cars out
of which here and there peered a man's head. The train almost came
to a stop. The cars clanged one against the other all down the
train. Fuselli was looking into a pair of eyes that shone in the
lamplight; a hand was held out to him.

"So long, kid," said a boyish voice. "I don't know who the hell
you are, but so long; good luck."

"So long," stammered Fuselli. "Going to the front?"

"Yer goddam right," answered another voice.

The train took up speed again; the clanging of car against car
ceased and in a moment they were moving fast before Fuselli's
eyes. Then the station was dark and empty again, and he was
watching the red light grow smaller and paler while the train
rumbled on into the darkness.



A confusion of gold and green and crimson silks and intricate
designs of naked pink-fleshed cupids filled Fuselli's mind, when,
full of wonder, he walked down the steps of the palace out into
the faint ruddy sunlight of the afternoon. A few names, Napoleon,
Josephine, the Empire, that had never had significance in his mind
before, flared with a lurid gorgeous light in his imagination like
a tableau of living statues at a vaudeville theatre.

"They must have had a heap of money, them guys," said the man who
was with him, a private in Aviation. "Let's go have a drink."

Fuselli was silent and absorbed in his thoughts. Here was
something that supplemented his visions of wealth and glory that
he used to tell Al about, when they'd sit and watch the big liners
come in, all glittering with lights, through the Golden Gate.

"They didn't mind having naked women about, did they?" said   the
private in Aviation, a  morose foul-mouthed little man who had
been in the woolen business. "D'ye blame them?"

"No, I can't say's I do.... I bet they was immoral, them guys," he
continued vaguely.

They wandered about the streets of Fontainebleau listlessly,
looking into shop windows, staring at women, lolling on benches in
the parks where the faint sunlight came through a lacework of
twigs purple and crimson and yellow, that cast intricate lavender-
grey shadows on the asphalt.

"Let's  go  have  another  drink,"  said  the  private  in
Aviation.

Fuselli looked at his watch; they had hours before train time.

A girl in a loose dirty blouse wiped off the table.

"Vin blank," said the other man.

"Mame shows," said Fuselli.

His head was full of gold and green mouldings and silk and crimson
velvet and intricate designs in which naked pink-fleshed cupids
writhed indecently. Some day, he was saying to himself, he'd make
a hell of a lot of money and live in a house like that with Mabe;
no, with Yvonne, or with some other girl.

"Must have been immoral, them guys," said the private in Aviation,
leering at the girl in the dirty blouse.

Fuselli remembered a revel he'd seen in a moving picture of "Quo
Vadis," people in bath robes dancing around with large cups in
their hands and tables full of dishes being upset.

"Cognac, beaucoup," said the private in Aviation.

"Mame shows," said Fuselli.

The cafe was full of gold and green silks, and great brocaded beds
with heavy carvings above them, beds in which writhed, pink-
fleshed and indecent, intricate patterns of cupids.

Somebody said, "Hello, Fuselli."

He was on the train; his ears hummed and his head had an iron band
round it. It was dark except for the little light that flickered
in the ceiling. For a minute he thought it was a goldfish in a
bowl, but it was a light that flickered in the ceiling.

"Hello, Fuselli," said Eisenstein. "Feel all right?"

"Sure," said Fuselli with a thick voice. "Why shouldn't I?"

"How did you find that house?" said Eisenstein seriously.

"Hell, I don't know," muttered Fuselli. "I'm goin' to sleep."

His mind was a jumble. He remembered vast halls full of green and
gold silks, and great beds with crowns over them where Napoleon
and Josephine used to sleep. Who were they? O yes, the Empire,--or
was it the Abdication? Then there were patterns of flowers and
fruits and cupids, all gilded, and a dark passage and stairs that
smelt musty, where he and the man in Aviation fell down. He
remembered how it felt to rub his nose hard on the gritty red
plush carpet of the stairs. Then there were women in open-work
skirts standing about, or were those the pictures on the walls?
And there was a bed with mirrors round it. He opened his eyes.
Eisenstein was talking to him. He must have been talking to him
for some time.

"I look at it this way," he was saying. "A feller needs a little
of that to keep healthy. Now, if he's abstemious and careful..."

Fuselli went to sleep. He woke up again thinking suddenly: he must
borrow that little blue book of army regulations. It would be
useful to know that in case something came up. The corporal who
had been in the Red Sox outfield had been transferred to a Base
Hospital. It was t. b. so Sergeant Osier said. Anyway they were
going to appoint an acting corporal. He stared at the flickering
little light in the ceiling.

"How did you get a pass?" Eisenstein was asking.

"Oh, the sergeant fixed me up with one," answered Fuselli
mysteriously.

"You're in pretty good with the sergeant, ain't yer?" said
Eisenstein.

Fuselli smiled deprecatingly.

"Say, d'ye know that little kid Stockton?"

"The white-faced little kid who's clerk in that outfit that has
the other end of the barracks?"

"That's him," said Eisenstein. "I wish I could do something to
help that kid. He just can't stand the discipline.... You ought to
see him wince when the red-haired sergeant over there yells at
him.... The kid looks sicker every day."

"Well, he's got a good soft job: clerk," said Fuselli.

"Ye think it's soft? I worked twelve hours day before yesterday
getting out reports," said Eisenstein, indignantly. "But the kid's
lost it and they keep ridin' him for some reason or other. It
hurts a feller to see that. He ought to be at home at school."

"He's got to take his medicine," said Fuselli.

"You wait till we get butchered in the trenches. We'll see how you
like your medicine," said Eisenstein.

"Damn fool," muttered Fuselli, composing himself to sleep again.



The bugle wrenched Fuselli out of his blankets, half dead with
sleep.

"Say, Bill, I got a head again," he muttered. There was no answer.
It was only then that he noticed that the cot next to his was
empty. The blankets were folded neatly at the foot. Sudden panic
seized him. He couldn't get along without Bill Grey, he said to
himself, he wouldn't have anyone to go round with. He looked
fixedly at the empty cot.

"Attention!"

The company was lined up in the dark with their feet in the mud
puddles of the road. The lieutenant strode up and down in front of
them with the tail of his trench coat sticking out behind. He had
a pocket flashlight that he kept flashing at the gaunt trunks of
trees, in the faces of the company, at his feet, in the puddles of
the road.

"If any man knows anything about the whereabouts of Private 1st-
class William Grey, report at once, as otherwise we shall have to
put him down A. W. O. L. You know what that means?" The lieutenant
spoke in short shrill periods, chopping off the ends of his words
as if with a hatchet.

No one said anything.

"I  guess he's S. O. L."; this from someone behind Fuselli.

"And I have one more announcement to make, men," said the
lieutenant in his natural voice. "I'm going to appoint Fuselli,
1st-class private, acting corporal."

Fuselli's knees were weak under him. He felt like shouting and
dancing with joy. He was glad it was dark so that no one could see
how excited he was.

"Sergeant, dismiss the company," said the lieutenant bringing his
voice back to its military tone.

"Companee dis-missed!" said out the sergeant jovially.

In groups, talking with crisp voices, cheered by the occurrence of
events, the company straggled across the great stretch of mud
puddles towards the mess shack.



                             IV

Yvonne tossed the omelette in the air. It landed sizzling in the
pan again, and she came forward into the light, holding the frying
pan before her. Behind her was the dark stove and above it a row
of copper kettles that gleamed through the bluish obscurity. She
flicked the omelette out of the pan into the white dish that stood
in the middle of the table, full in the yellow lamplight.

"Tiens," she said, brushing a few stray hairs off her forehead
with the back of her hand.

"You're some cook," said Fuselli getting to his feet. He had been
sprawling on a chair in the other end of the kitchen, watching
Yvonne's slender body in tight black dress and blue apron move in
and out of the area of light as she got dinner ready. A smell of
burnt butter with a faint tang of pepper in it, filled the
kitchen, making his mouth water.

"This is the real stuff," he was saying to himself,--"like home."

He stood with his hands deep in his pockets and his head thrown
back, watching her cut the bread, holding the big loaf to her
chest and pulling the knife towards her. she brushed some crumbs
off her dress with a thin white hand.

"You're my girl, Yvonne; ain't yer?" Fuselli put his arms round
her.

"Sale bete," she said, laughing and pushing him away.

There was a brisk step outside and another girl came into the
kitchen, a thin yellow-faced girl with a sharp nose and long
teeth.

"Ma   cousine.... Mon 'tit americain." They both laughed. Fuselli
blushed as he shook the girl's hand.

"Il est beau, hein?" said Yvonne gruffly.

"Mais, ma petite, il est charmant, vot' americain!" They laughed
again. Fuselli who did not understand laughed too, thinking to
himself, "They'll let the dinner get cold if they don't sit down
soon."

"Get maman, Dan," said Yvonne. Fuselli went into the shop through
the room with the long oak table. In the dim light that came from
the kitchen he saw the old woman's white bonnet. Her face was in
shadow but there was a faint gleam of light in her small beady
eyes.

"Supper, ma'am," he shouted.

Grumbling in her creaky little voice, the old woman followed him
back into the kitchen.

Steam, gilded by the lamplight, rose in pillars to the ceiling
from the big tureen of soup.

There was a white cloth on the table and a big loaf of bread at
the end. The plates, with borders of little roses on them, seemed,
after the army mess, the most beautiful things Fuselli had ever
seen. The wine bottle was black beside the soup tureen and the
wine in the glasses cast a dark purple stain on the cloth.

Fuselli ate his soup silently understanding very little of the
French that the two girls rattled at each other. The old woman
rarely spoke and when she did one of the girls would throw her a
hasty remark that hardly interrupted their chatter.

Fuselli was thinking of the other men lining up outside the dark
mess shack and the sound the food made when it flopped into the
mess kits. An idea came to him. He'd have to bring Sarge to see
Yvonne. They could set him up to a feed. "It would help me to stay
in good with him," He had a minute's worry about his corporalship.
He was acting corporal right enough, but he wanted them to send in
his appointment.

The omelette melted in his mouth.

"Damn bon," he said to Yvonne with his mouth full.

She looked at him fixedly.

"Bon, bon," he said again.

"You.... Dan, bon," she said and laughed. The cousin was looking
from one to the other enviously, her upper lip lifted away from
her teeth in a smile.

The old woman munched her bread in a silent preoccupied fashion.

"There's somebody in the store," said Fuselli after a long pause.
"Je irey." He put his napkin down and went out wiping his mouth on
the back of his hand. Eisenstein and a chalky-faced boy were in
the shop.

"Hullo! are you keepin' house here?" asked Eisenstein.

"Sure," said Fuselli conceitedly.

"Have you got any chawclit?" asked the chalky-faced boy in a thin
bloodless voice.

Fuselli looked round the shelves and threw a cake of chocolate
down on the counter.

"Anything else?"

"Nothing, thank you, corporal. How much is it?"

Whistling "There's a long, long trail a-winding," Fuselli strode
back into the inner room.

"Combien chocolate?" he asked.

When he had received the money, he sat down at his place at table
again, smiling importantly. He must write Al about all this, he
was thinking, and he was wondering vaguely whether Al had been
drafted yet.

After dinner the women sat a long time chatting over their coffee,
while Fuselli squirmed uneasily on his chair, looking now and then
at his watch. His pass was till twelve only; it was already
getting on to ten. He tried to catch Yvonne's eye, but she was
moving about the kitchen putting things in order for the night,
and hardly seemed to notice him. At last the old woman shuffled
into the shop and there was the sound of a key clicking hard in
the outside door. When she came back, Fuselli said good-night to
everyone and left by the back door into the court. There he leaned
sulkily against the wall and waited in the dark, listening to the
sounds that came from the house. He could see shadows passing
across the orange square of light the window threw on the cobbles
of the court. A light went on in an upper window, sending a faint
glow over the disorderly tiles of the roof of the shed opposite.
The door opened and Yvonne and her cousin stood on the broad stone
doorstep chattering. Fuselli had pushed himself in behind a big
hogshead that had a pleasant tang of old wood damp with sour wine.
At last the heads of the shadows on the cobbles came together for
a moment and the cousin clattered across the court and out into
the empty streets. Her rapid footsteps died away. Yvonne's shadow
was still in the door:

"Dan," she said softly.

Fuselli came out from behind the hogshead, his whole body flushing
with delight. Yvonne pointed to his shoes. He took them off, and
left them beside the door. He looked at his watch. It was a
quarter to eleven.

"Viens," she said.

He followed her, his knees trembling a little from excitement, up
the steep stairs.



The deep broken strokes of the town clock had just begun to strike
midnight when Fuselli hurried in the camp gate. He gave up his
pass jauntily to the guard and strolled towards his barracks. The
long shed was pitch black, full of a sound of deep breathing and
of occasional snoring. There was a thick smell of uniform wool on
which the sweat had dried. Fuselli undressed without haste,
stretching his arms luxuriously. He wriggled into his blankets
feeling cool and tired, and went to sleep with a smile of self-
satisfaction on his lips.



The companies were lined up for retreat, standing stiff as toy
soldiers outside their barracks. The evening was almost warm. A
little playful wind, oozing with springtime, played with the
swollen buds on the plane trees. The sky was a drowsy violet
color, and the blood pumped hot and stinging through the stiffened
arms and legs of the soldiers who stood at attention. The voices
of the non-coms were particularly harsh and metallic this evening.
It was rumoured that a general was about. Orders were shouted with
fury.

Standing behind the line of his company, Fuselli's chest was stuck
out until the buttons of his tunic were in danger of snapping off.
His shoes were well-shined, and he wore a new pair of puttees,
wound so tightly that his legs ached.

At last the bugle sounded across the silent camp.

"Parade rest!" shouted the lieutenant.

Fuselli's mind was full of the army regulations which he had been
studying assiduously for the last week. He was thinking of an
imaginary examination for the corporalship, which he would pass,
of course.

When the company was dismissed, he went up familiarly to the top
sergeant:

"Say, Sarge, doin' anything this evenin'?"

"What the hell can a man do when he's broke?" said the top
sergeant.

"Well, you come down town with me. I want to introjuce you to
somebody."

"Great!"

"Say, Sarge, have they sent that appointment in yet?"

"No, they haven't, Fuselli," said the top sergeant. "It's all made
out," he added encouragingly.

They walked towards the town silently. The evening was silvery-
violet. The few windows in the old grey-green houses that were
lighted shone orange.

"Well, I'm goin' to get it, ain't I?"

A staff car shot by, splashing them with mud, leaving them a
glimpse of officers leaning back in the deep cushions.

"You sure are," said the top sergeant in his good-natured voice.

They had reached the square. They saluted stiffly as two officers
brushed past them.

"What's the regulations about a feller marryin' a French girl?"
broke out Fuselli suddenly.

"Thinking of getting hitched up, are you?"

"Hell, no." Fuselli was crimson. "I just sort o' wanted to know."

"Permission of C. O., that's all I know of."

They had stopped in front of the grocery shop. Fuselli peered in
through the window. The shop was full of soldiers lounging against
the counter and the walls. In the midst of them, demurely
knitting, sat Yvonne.

"Let's go and have a drink an' then come back," said Fuselli.

They went to the cafe where Marie of the white arms presided.
Fuselli paid for two hot rum punches.

"You see it's this way, Sarge," he said confidentially, "I wrote
all my folks at home I'd been made corporal, an' it'ld be a hell
of a note to be let down now."

The top sergeant was drinking his hot drink in little sips. He
smiled broadly and put his hand paternal-fashion on Fuselli's
knee.

"Sure; you needn't worry, kid. I've got you fixed up all right,"
he said; then he added jovially, "Well, let's go see that girl of
yours."

They went out into the dark streets, where the wind, despite the
smell of burnt gasolene and army camps, had a faint suavity,
something like the smell of mushrooms; the smell of spring.

Yvonne sat under the lamp in the shop, her feet up on a box of
canned peas, yawning dismally. Behind her on the counter was the
glass case full of yellow and greenish-white cheeses. Above that
shelves rose to the ceiling in the brownish obscurity of the shop
where gleamed faintly large jars and small jars, cans neatly
placed in rows, glass jars and vegetables. In the corner, near the
glass curtained door that led to the inner room, hung clusters of
sausages large and small, red, yellow, and speckled. Yvonne jumped
up when Fuselli and the sergeant opened the door.

"You are good," she said. "Je mourrais de cafard." They laughed.

"You know what that mean--cafard?"

"Sure."

"It is only since the war. Avant la guerre on ne savais pas ce que
c'etait le cafard. The war is no good."

"Funny, ain't it?" said Fuselli to the top sergeant, "a feller
can't juss figure out what the war is like."

"Don't you worry. We'll all get there," said the top sergeant
knowingly.

"This is the sarjon, Yvonne," said Fuselli.

"Oui, oui, je sais," said Yvonne, smiling at the top sergeant.
They sat in the little room behind the shop and drank white wine,
and talked as best they could to Yvonne, who, very trim in her
black dress and blue apron, perched on the edge of her chair with
her feet in tiny pumps pressed tightly together, and glanced now
and then at the elaborate stripes on the top sergeant's arm.



Fuselli strode familiarly into the grocery shop, whistling, and
threw open the door to the inner room. His whistling stopped in
the middle of a bar.

"Hello," he said in an annoyed voice.

"Hello, corporal," said Eisenstein. Eisenstein, his French soldier
friend, a lanky man with a scraggly black heard and burning black
eyes, and Stockton, the chalky-faced boy, were sitting at the
table that filled up the room, chatting intimately and gaily with
Yvonne, who leaned against the yellow wall beside the Frenchman
and showed all her little pearly teeth in a laugh. In the middle
of the dark oak table was a pot of hyacinths and some glasses that
had had wine in them. The odor of the hyacinths hung in the air
with a faint warm smell from the kitchen.

After a second's hesitation, Fuselli sat down to wait until the
others should leave. It was long after pay-day and his pockets
were empty, so he had nowhere else to go.

"How are they treatin' you down in your outfit now?" asked
Eisenstein of Stockton, after a silence.

"Same as ever," said Stockton in his thin voice, stuttering a
little.... "Sometimes I wish I was dead."

"Hum," said Eisenstein, a curious expression of understanding on
his flabby face. "We'll be civilians some day."

"I won't" said Stockton.

"Hell," said Eisenstein. "You've got to keep your upper lip stiff.
I thought I was goin' to die in that troopship coming over here.
An' when I was little an' came over with the emigrants from
Poland, I thought I was goin' to die. A man can stand more than he
thinks for.... I never thought I could stand being in the army,
bein' a slave like an' all that, an' I'm still here. No, you'll
live long and be successful yet." He put his hand on Stockton's
shoulder. The boy winced and drew his chair away. "What for you do
that? I ain't goin' to hurt you," said Eisenstein.

Fuselli looked at them both with a disgusted interest.

"I'll tell you what you'd better do, kid," he said
condescendingly. "You get transferred to our company. It's an Al
bunch, ain't it, Eisenstein? We've got a good loot an' a good top-
kicker, an' a damn good bunch o' fellers."

"Our top-kicker was in here a few minutes ago," said Eisenstein.

"He was?" asked Fuselli. "Where'd he go?"

"Damned if I know."

Yvonne and the French soldier were talking in low voices, laughing
a little now and then. Fuselli leaned back in his chair looking at
them, feeling out of things, wishing despondently that he knew
enough French to understand what they were saying. He scraped his
feet angrily back and forth on the floor. His eyes lit on the
white hyacinths. They made him think of florists' windows at home
at Eastertime and the noise and bustle of San Francisco's streets.
"God, I hate this rotten hole," he muttered to himself. He thought
of Mabe. He made a noise with his lips. Hell, she was married by
this time. Anyway Yvonne was the girl for him. If he could only
have Yvonne to himself; far away somewhere, away from the other
men and that damn frog and her old mother. He thought of himself
going to the theatre with Yvonne. When he was a sergeant he would
be able to afford that sort of thing. He counted up the months. It
was March. Here he'd been in Europe five months and he was still
only a corporal, and not that yet. He clenched his fists with
impatience. But once he got to be a non-com it would go faster, he
told himself reassuringly.

He leaned over and sniffed loudly at the hyacinths.

"They smell good," he said. "Que disay vous, Yvonne?"

Yvonne looked at him as if she had forgotten that he was in the
room. Her eyes looked straight into his, and she burst out
laughing. Her glance had made him feel warm all over, and he
leaned back in his chair again, looking at her slender body so
neatly cased in its black dress and at her little head with its
tightly-done hair, with a comfortable feeling of possession.

"Yvonne, come over here," he said, beckoning with his head.
She looked from him to the Frenchman provocatively. Then she came
over and stood behind him.

"Que voulez-vous?"

Fuselli glanced at Eisenstein. He and Stockton were deep in
excited conversation with the Frenchman again. Fuselli heard that
uncomfortable word that always made him angry, he did not know
why, "Revolution."

"Yvonne," he said so that only she could hear, "what you say you
and me get married?"

"Marries.... moi et toi?" asked Yvonne in a puzzled voice.

"We we."

She looked him in the eyes a moment, and then threw hack her head
in a paroxysm of hysterical laughter.

Fuselli flushed scarlet, got to his feet and strode out, slamming
the door behind him so that the glass rang. He walked hurriedly
back to camp, splashed with mud by the long lines of grey motor
trucks that were throbbing their way slowly through the main
street, each with a yellow eye that lit up faintly the tailboards
of the truck ahead. The barracks were dark and nearly empty. He
sat down at the sergeant's desk and began moodily turning over the
pages of the little blue book of Army Regulations.



The moonlight glittered in the fountain at the end of the main
square of the town. It was a warm dark night of faint clouds
through which the moon shone palely as through a thin silk canopy.
Fuselli stood by the fountain smoking a cigarette, looking at the
yellow windows of the Cheval Blanc at the other end of the square,
from which came a sound of voices and of billiard balls clinking.
He stood quiet letting the acrid cigarette smoke drift out through
his nose, his ears full of the silvery tinkle of the water in the
fountain beside him. There were little drifts of warm and chilly
air in the breeze that blew fitfully from the west. Fuselli was
waiting. He took out his watch now and then and strained his eyes
to see the time, but there was not light enough. At last the deep
broken note of the bell in the church spire struck once. It must
be half past ten.

He started walking slowly towards the street where Yvonne's
grocery shop was. The faint glow of the moon lit up the grey
houses with the shuttered windows and tumultuous red roofs full of
little dormers and skylights. Fuselli felt deliciously at ease
with the world. He could almost feel Yvonne's body in his arms and
he smiled as he remembered the little faces she used to make at
him. He slunk past the shuttered windows of the shop and dove into
the darkness under the arch that led to the court. He walked
cautiously, on tiptoe, keeping close to the moss-covered wall, for
he heard voices in the court. He peeped round the edge of the
building and saw that there were several people in the kitchen
door talking. He drew his head back into the shadow. But he had
caught a glimpse of the dark round form of the hogshead beside the
kitchen door. If he only could get behind that as he usually did,
he would be hidden until the people went away.

Keeping well in the shadow round the edge of the court, he slipped
to the other side, and was just about to pop himself in behind the
hogshead when he noticed that someone was there before him.

He caught his breath and stood still, his heart thumping. The
figure turned and in the dark he recognised the top sergeant's
round face.

"Keep quiet, can't you?" whispered the top sergeant peevishly.

Fuselli stood still with his fists clenched. The blood flamed
through his head, making his scalp tingle.

Still the top sergeant was the top sergeant, came the thought. It
would never do to get in wrong with him. Fuselli's legs moved him
automatically back into a corner of the court, where he leaned
against the damp wall; glaring with smarting eyes at the two women
who stood talking outside the kitchen door, and at the dark shadow
behind the hogshead. At last, after several smacking kisses, the
women went away and the kitchen door closed. The bell in the
church spire struck eleven slowly and mournfully. When it had
ceased striking, Fuselli heard a discreet tapping and saw the
shadow of the top sergeant against the door. As he slipped in,
Fuselli heard the top sergeant's good-natured voice in a large
stage whisper, followed by a choked laugh  from Yvonne. The
door closed and the light was extinguished, leaving the court
in darkness except for a faint marbled glow in the sky.

Fuselli strode out, making as much noise as he could with his
heels on the cobble stones. The streets of the town were silent
under the pale moon. In the square the fountain sounded loud and
metallic. He gave up his pass to the guard and strode glumly
towards the barracks. At the door he met a man with a pack on his
back.

"Hullo, Fuselli," said a voice he knew. "Is my old bunk still
there?"

"Damned if I know," said Fuselli; "I thought they'd shipped you
home."

The corporal who had been on the Red Sox outfield broke into a fit
of coughing.

"Hell, no," he said. "They kep' me at that goddam hospital till
they saw I wasn't goin' to die right away, an' then they told me
to come back to my outfit. So here I am!"

"Did they bust you?" said Fuselli with sudden eagerness.

"Hell, no. Why should they? They ain't gone and got a new
corporal, have they?"

"No, not exactly," said Fuselli.



                             V

Meadville stood near the camp gate, watching the motor trucks go
by on the main road. Grey, lumbering, and mud-covered, they
throbbed by sloughing in and out of the mud holes in the worn road
in an endless train stretching as far as he could see into the
town and as far as he could see up the road.

He stood with his legs far apart and spat into the center of the
road; then he turned to the corporal who had been in the Red Sox
outfield and said:

"I'll be goddamed if there ain't somethin' doin'!"

"A hell of a lot doin'," said the corporal, shaking his head.

"Seen that guy Daniels who's been to the front?"

"No."

"Well, he says hell's broke loose. Hell's broke loose!"

"What's happened?... Be gorry, we may see some active service,"
said Meadville, grinning. "By God, I'd give the best colt on my
ranch to see some action."

"Got a ranch?" asked the corporal.

The motor trucks kept on grinding past monotonously; their drivers
were so splashed with mud it was hard to see what uniform they
wore.

"What d'ye think?" asked Meadville. "Think I keep store?"

Fuselli walked past them towards the town.

"Say, Fuselli," shouted Meadville. "Corporal says hell's broke
loose out there. We may smell gunpowder yet."

Fuselli stopped and joined them.

"I guess poor old Bill Grey's smelt plenty of gunpowder by this
time," he said.

"I wish I had gone with him," said Meadville. "I'll try that
little trick myself now the good weather's come on if we don't get
a move on soon."

"Too damn risky!"

"Listen to the kid. It'll be too damn risky in the trenches.... Or
do you think you're goin' to get a cushy job in camp here?"

"Hell, no! I want to go to the front. I don't want to stay in this
hole."

"Well?"

"But ain't no good throwin' yerself in where it don't do no
good.... A guy wants to get on in this army if he can."

"What's the good o' gettin' on?" said the corporal. "Won't get
home a bit sooner."

"Hell! but you're a non-com."

Another train of motor trucks went by, drowning their
Talk.



Fuselli was packing medical supplies in a box in a great brownish
warehouse full of packing cases where a little sun filtered in
through the dusty air at the corrugated sliding tin doors. As he
worked, he listened to Daniels talking to Meadville who worked
beside him.

"An' the gas is the goddamndest stuff I ever heard of," he was
saying. "I've seen fellers with their arms swelled up to twice the
size like blisters from it. Mustard gas, they call it."

"What did you get to go to the hospital?" said Meadville.

"Only pneumonia," said Daniels, "but I had a buddy who was split
right in half by a piece of a shell. He was standin' as near me as
you are an' was whistlin' 'Tipperary' under his breath when all at
once there was a big spurt o' blood an' there he was with his
chest split in half an' his head hangin' a thread like."

Meadville moved his quid of tobacco from one cheek to the other
and spat on to the sawdust of the floor. The men within earshot
stopped working and looked admiringly at Daniels.

"Well; what d'ye reckon's goin' on at the front now?" said
Meadville.

"Damned of I know. The goddam hospital at Orleans was so full up
there was guys in stretchers waiting all day on the pavement
outside. I know that.... Fellers there said hell'd broke loose for
fair. Looks to me like the Fritzies was advancin'."

Meadville looked at him incredulously.

"Those skunks?" said Fuselli. "Why they can't advance. They're
starvin' to death."

"The hell they are," said Daniels. "I guess you believe everything
you see in the papers."

Eyes looked at Daniels indignantly. They all went on working in
silence.

Suddenly the lieutenant, looking strangely flustered, strode into
the warehouse, leaving the tin door open behind him.

"Can anyone tell me where Sergeant Osler is?"

"He was here a few minutes ago," spoke up Fuselli.

"Well, where is he now?" snapped the lieutenant angrily.

"I don't know, sir," mumbled Fuselli, flushing.

"Go and see if you can find him."

Fuselli went off to the other end of the warehouse. Outside the
door he stopped and bit off a cigarette in a leisurely fashion.
His blood boiled sullenly. How the hell should he know where the
top sergeant was? They didn't expect him to be a mind-reader, did
they? And all the flood of bitterness that had been collecting in
his spirit seethed to the surface. They had not treated him right,
He felt full of hopeless anger against this vast treadmill to
which he was bound. The endless succession of the days, all alike,
all subject to orders, to the interminable monotony of drills and
line-ups, passed before his mind. He felt he couldn't go on, yet
he knew that he must and would go on, that there was no stopping,
that his feet would go on beating in time to the steps of the
treadmill.

He caught sight of the sergeant coming towards the warehouse,
across the new green grass, scarred by the marks of truck wheels.

"Sarge," he called. Then he went up to him mysteriously. "The loot
wants to see you at once in Warehouse B."

He slouched back to his work, arriving just in time to hear the
lieutenant say in a severe voice to the sergeant:

"Sergeant, do you know how to draw up court-martial papers?"

"Yes, sir," said the sergeant, a look of surprise on his face. He
followed the precise steps of the lieutenant out of the door.

Fuselli had a moment of panic terror, during which he went on
working methodically, although his hands trembled. He was
searching his memory for some infringement of a regulation that
might be charged against him. The terror passed as fast as it had
come. Of course he had no reason to fear. He laughed softly to
himself. What a fool he'd been to get scared like that, and a
summary court-martial couldn't do much to you anyway. He went on
working as fast and as carefully as he could, through the long
monotonous afternoon.

That night nearly the whole company gathered in a group at the end
of the barracks. Both sergeants were away. The corporal said he
knew nothing, and got sulkily into bed, where he lay, rolled in
his blankets, shaken by fit after fit of coughing.

At last someone said:

"I bet that kike Eisenstein's turned out to be a spy."

"I bet he has too."

"He's foreign born, ain't he? Born in Poland or some goddam
place."

"He always did talk queer."

"I always thought," said Fuselli, "he'd get into trouble talking
the way he did."

"How'd he talk?" asked Daniels.

"Oh, he said that war was wrong and all that goddamed pro-German
stuff."

"D'ye know what they did out at the front?" said Daniels. "In the
second division they made two fellers dig their own graves and
then shot 'em for sayin' the war was wrong."

"Hell, they did?"

"You're goddam right, they did. I tell you, fellers, it don't do
to monkey with the buzz-saw in this army."

"For God's sake shut up. Taps has blown. Meadville, turn the
lights out!" said the corporal angrily. The barracks was dark,
full of a sound of men undressing in their bunks, and of whispered
talk.



The company was lined up for morning mess. The sun that had just
risen was shining in rosily through the soft clouds of the sky.
The sparrows kept up a great clattering in the avenue of plane
trees. Their riotous chirping could be heard above the sound of
motors starting that came from a shed opposite the mess shack.

The sergeant appeared suddenly; walking past with his shoulders
stiff, so that everyone knew at once that something important was
going on.

"Attention, men, a minute," he said.

Mess kits clattered as the men turned round.

"After mess I want you to go immediately to barracks and roll your
packs. After that every man must stand by his pack until orders
come." The company cheered and mess kits clattered together like
cymbals.

"As you were," shouted the top sergeant jovially.

Gluey oatmeal and greasy bacon were hurriedly bolted down, and
every man in the company, his heart pounding, ran to the barracks
to do up his pack, feeling proud under the envious eyes of the
company at the other end of the shack that had received no orders.

When the packs were done up, they sat on the empty hunks and
drummed their feet against the wooden partitions waiting.

"I don't suppose we'll leave here till hell freezes over," said
Meadville, who was doing up the last strap on his pack.

"It's always like this.... You break your neck to obey orders
an'..."

"Outside!" shouted the sergeant, poking his head in the door.

"Fall in! Atten-shun!"

The lieutenant in his trench coat and in a new pair of roll
puttees stood facing the company, looking solemn.

"Men," he said, biting off his words as a man bites through a
piece of hard stick candy; "one of your number is up for court-
martial for possibly disloyal statements found in a letter
addressed to friends at home. I have been extremely grieved to
find anything of this sort in any company of mine; I don't believe
there is another man in the company...low enough to hold...
entertain such ideas...."

Every man in the company stuck out his chest, vowing inwardly to
entertain no ideas at all rather than run the risk of calling
forth such disapproval from the lieutenant. The lieutenant paused:

"All I can say is if there is any such man in the company, he had
better keep his mouth shut and be pretty damn careful what he
writes home.... Dismissed!"

He shouted the order grimly, as if it were the order for the
execution of the offender.

"That goddam skunk Eisenstein," said someone.

The lieutenant heard it as he walked away. "Oh, sergeant," he said
familiarly; "I think the others have got the right stuff in them."

The company went into the barracks and waited.



The sergeant-major's office was full of a clicking of typewriters,
and was overheated by a black stove that stood in the middle of
the floor, letting out occasional little puffs of smoke from a
crack in the stove pipe. The sergeant-major was a small man with a
fresh boyish face and a drawling voice who lolled behind a large
typewriter reading a magazine that lay on his lap.

Fuselli slipped in behind the typewriter and stood with his cap in
his hand beside the sergeant-major's chair.

"Well what do you want?" asked the sergeant-major gruffly.

"A feller told me, Sergeant-Major, that you was look-in' for a man
with optical experience;" Fuselli's voice was velvety.

"Well?"

"I worked three years in an optical-goods store at home in
Frisco."

"What's your name, rank, company?"

"Daniel Fuselli, Private 1st-class, Company C, medical supply
warehouse."

"All right, I'll attend to it."

"But, sergeant."

"All right; out with what you've got to say, quick." The sergeant-
major fingered the leaves of his magazine impatiently.

"My company's all packed up to go. The transfer'll have to be
today, sergeant."

"Why the hell didn't you come in earlier?... Stevens, make out a
transfer to headquarters company and get the major to sign it when
he goes through.... That's the way it always is," he cried,
leaning back tragically in his swivel chair. "Everybody always
puts everything off on me at the last minute."

"Thank you, sir," said Fuselli, smiling. The sergeant-major ran
his hand through his hair and took up his magazine again
peevishly.

Fuselli hurried back to barracks where he found the company still
waiting. Several men were crouched in a circle playing craps. The
rest lounged in their bare bunks or fiddled with their packs.
Outside it had begun to rain softly, and a smell of wet sprouting
earth came in through the open door. Fuselli sat on the floor
beside his bunk throwing his knife down so that it stuck in the
boards between his knees. He was whistling softly to himself. The
day dragged on. Several times he heard the town clock strike in
the distance.

At last the top sergeant came in, shaking the water off his
slicker, a serious, important expression on his face.

"Inspection of medical belts," he shouted. "Everybody open up
their belt and lay it on the foot of their bunk and stand at
attention on the left side."

The lieutenant and a major appeared suddenly at one end of the
barracks and came through slowly, pulling the little packets out
of the belts. The men looked at them out of the corners of their
eyes. As they examined the belts, they chatted easily, as if they
had been alone.

"Yes," said the major. "We're in for it this time.... That damned
offensive."

"Well, we'll be able to show 'em what we're good for," said the
lieutenant, laughing. "We haven't had a chance yet."

"Hum! Better mark that belt, lieutenant, and have it changed. Been
to the front yet?"

"No, sir."

"Hum, well.... You'll look at things differently when you have,"
said the major.

The lieutenant frowned.

"Well, on the whole, lieutenant, your outfit is in very good
shape.... At ease, men!" The lieutenant and the major stood at the
door a moment raising the collars of their coats; then they dove
out into the rain.

A few minutes later the sergeant came in.

"All right, get your slickers on and line up."

They stood lined up in the rain for a long while. It was a leaden
afternoon. The even clouds had a faint coppery tinge. The rain
beat in their faces, making them tingle. Fuselli was looking
anxiously at the sergeant. At last the lieutenant appeared.

"Attention!" cried the sergeant.

The roll was called and a new man fell in at the end of the line,
a tall man with large protruding eyes like a calf's.

"Private 1st-class Daniel Fuselli, fall out and report to
headquarters company!"

Fuselli saw a look of surprise come over men's faces. He smiled
wanly at Meadville.

"Sergeant, take the men down to the station."

"Squads, right," cried the sergeant. "March!"

The company tramped off into the streaming rain.

Fuselli went back to the barracks, took off his pack and slicker
and wiped the water off his face.



The rails gleamed gold in the early morning sunshine above the
deep purple cinders of the track. Fuselli's eyes followed the
track until it curved into a cutting where the wet clay was a
bright orange in the clear light. The station platform, where
puddles from the night's rain glittered as the wind ruffled them,
was empty. Fuselli started walking up and down with his hands in
his pockets. He had been sent down to unload some supplies that
were coming on that morning's train. He felt free and successful
since he joined the headquarters company! At last, he told
himself, he had a job where he could show what he was good for. He
walked up and down whistling shrilly.

A train pulled slowly into the station. The engine stopped to take
water and the couplings clanked all down the line of cars. The
platform was suddenly full of men in khaki, stamping their feet,
running up and down shouting.

"Where you guys goin'?" asked Fuselli.

"We're bound for Palm Beach. Don't we look it?" someone snarled in
reply.

But Fuselli had seen a familiar face. He was shaking hands with
two browned men whose faces were grimy with days of travelling in
freight cars.

"Hullo, Chrisfield. Hullo, Andrews!" he cried. "When did you
fellows get over here?"

"Oh, 'bout four months ago," said Chrisfield, whose black eyes
looked at Fuselli searchingly. "Oh! Ah 'member you. You're
Fuselli. We was at trainin' camp together. 'Member him, Andy?"

"Sure," said Andrews. "How are you makin' out?"

"Fine," said Fuselli. "I'm in the optical department here."

"Where the hell's that?"

"Right here." Fuselli pointed vaguely behind the station.

"We've been training about four months near Bordeaux," said
Andrews; "and now we're going to see what it's like."

The whistle blew and the engine started puffing hard. Clouds of
white steam filled the station platform, where the soldiers
scampered for their cars.

"Good luck!" said Fuselli; but Andrews and Chrisfield had already
gone. He saw them again as the train pulled out, two brown and
dirt-grimed faces among many other brown and dirt-grimed faces.
The steam floated up tinged with yellow in the bright early
morning air as the last car of the train disappeared round the
curve into the cutting.



The dust rose thickly about the worn broom. As it was a dark
morning, very little light filtered into the room full of great
white packing cases, where Fuselli was sweeping. He stopped now
and then and leaned on his broom. Far away he heard a sound of
trains shunting and shouts and the sound of feet tramping in
unison from the drill ground. The building where he was was
silent. He went on sweeping, thinking of his company tramping off
through the streaming rain, and of those fellows he had known in
training Camp in America, Andrews and Chrisfield, jolting in box
cars towards the front, where Daniel's buddy had had his chest
split in half by a piece of shell. And he'd written home he'd been
made a corporal. What was he going to do when letters came for
him, addressed Corporal Dan Fuselli? Putting the broom away, he
dusted the yellow chair and the table covered with order slips
that stood in the middle of the piles of packing boxes. The door
slammed somewhere below and there was a step on the stairs that
led to the upper part of the warehouse. A little man with a
monkey-like greyish-brown face and spectacles appeared and slipped
out of his overcoat, like a very small bean popping out of a very
large pod.

The sergeant's stripes looked unusually wide and conspicuous on
his thin arm.

He grunted at Fuselli, sat down at the desk, and began at once
peering among the order slips.

"Anything in our mailbox this morning?" he asked Fuselli in a
hoarse voice.

"It's all there, sergeant," said Fuselli.

The sergeant peered about the desk some more.

"Ye'll have to wash that window today," he said after a pause.
"Major's likely to come round here any time.... Ought to have been
done yesterday."

"All right," said Fuselli dully.

He slouched over to the corner of the room, got the worn broom and
began sweeping down the stairs. The dust rose about him, making
him cough. He stopped and leaned on the broom. He thought of all
the days that had gone by since he'd last seen those fellows,
Andrews and Chrisfield, at training camp in America; and of all
the days that would go by. He started sweeping again, sweeping the
dust down from stair to stair.



Fuselli sat on the end of his bunk. He had just shaved. It was a
Sunday morning and he looked forward to having the afternoon off.
He rubbed his face on his towel and got to his feet. Outside, the
rain fell in great silvery sheets, so that the noise on the tar-
paper roof of the barracks was almost deafening.

Fuselli noticed, at the other end of the row of bunks, a group of
men who all seemed to be looking at the same thing. Rolling down
his sleeves, with his tunic hitched over one arm, he walked down
to see what was the matter. Through the patter of the rain, he
heard a thin voice say:

"It ain't no use, sergeant, I'm sick. I ain't a' goin' to get up."

"The kid's crazy," someone beside Fuselli said, turning
away.

"You get up this minute," roared the sergeant. He was a big man
with black hair who looked like a lumberman. He stood over the
bunk. In the bunk at the end of a bundle of blankets was the
chalk-white face of Stockton. The boy's teeth were clenched, and
his eyes were round and protruding, it seemed from terror.

"You get out o' bed this minute," roared the sergeant again.

The boy; was silent; his white cheeks quivered.

"What the hell's the matter with him?"

"Why don't you yank him out yourself, Sarge?"

"You get out of bed this minute," shouted the sergeant again,
paying no attention.

The men gathered about walked away. Fuselli watched fascinated
from a little distance.

"All right, then, I'll get the lieutenant. This is a court-martial
offence. Here, Morton and Morrison, you're guards over this man."

The boy lay still in his blankets. He closed his eyes. By the way
the blanket rose and fell over his chest, they could see that he
was breathing heavily.

"Say, Stockton, why don't you get up, you fool?"' said Fuselli.
"You can't buck the whole army."

The boy didn't answer.

Fuselli walked away.

"He's crazy," he muttered.

The lieutenant was a stoutish red-faced man who came in puffing
followed by the tall sergeant. He stopped and shook the water off
his Campaign hat. The rain kept up its deafening patter on the
roof.

"Look here, are you sick? If you are, report sick call at once,"
said the lieutenant in an elaborately kind voice.

The boy looked at him dully and did not answer.

"You should get up and stand at attention when an officer speaks
to you.

"I ain't goin' to get up," came the thin voice.

The officer's red face became crimson.

"Sergeant, what's the matter with the man?" he asked in a furious
tone.

"I can't do anything with him, lieutenant. I think he's gone
crazy."

"Rubbish.... Mere insubordination.... You're under arrest, d'ye
hear?" he shouted towards the bed.

There was no answer. The rain pattered hard on the roof.

"Have him brought down to the guardhouse, by force if necessary,"
snapped the lieutenant. He strode towards the door. "And sergeant,
start drawing up court-martial papers at once." The door slammed
behind him.

"Now you've got to get him up," said the sergeant to the two
guards.

Fuselli walked away.

"Ain't some people damn fools?" he said to a man at the other end
of the barracks. He stood looking out of the window at the bright
sheets of the rain.

"Well, get him up," shouted the sergeant.

The boy lay with his eyes closed, his chalk-white face half-hidden
by the blankets; he was very still.

"Well, will you get up and go to the guardhouse, or have we to
carry you there?" shouted the sergeant.

The guards laid hold of him gingerly and pulled him up to a
sitting posture.

"All right, yank him out of bed."

The frail form in khaki shirt and whitish drawers was held up for
a moment between the two men. Then it fell a limp heap on the
floor.

"Say, Sarge, he's fainted."

"The hell he has.... Say, Morrison, ask one of the orderlies to
come up from the Infirmary."

"He ain't fainted.... The kid's dead," said the other man.

"Give me a hand."

The sergeant helped lift the body on the bed again. "Well, I'll be
goddamned," said the sergeant.

The eyes had opened. They covered the head with a blanket.



                     PART THREE: MACHINES

                            I

The fields and the misty blue-green woods slipped by slowly as the
box car rumbled and jolted over the rails, now stopping for hours
on sidings amid meadows, where it was quiet and where above the
babel of voices of the regiment you could hear the skylarks, now
clattering fast over bridges and along the banks of jade-green
rivers where the slim poplars were just coming into leaf and where
now and then a fish jumped. The men crowded in the door, grimy and
tired, leaning on each other's shoulders and watching the plowed
lands slip by and the meadows where the golden-green grass was
dappled with buttercups, and the villages of huddled red roofs
lost among pale budding trees and masses of peach blossom. Through
the smells of steam and coal smoke and of unwashed bodies in
uniforms came smells of moist fields and of manure from fresh-
sowed patches and of cows and pasture lands just coming into
flower.

"Must be right smart o'craps in this country.... Ain't like that
damn Polignac, Andy?" said Chrisfield.

"Well, they made us drill so hard there wasn't any time for the
grass to grow."

"You're damn right there warn't."

"Ah'd lak te live in this country a while," said Chrisfield.

"We might ask 'em to let us off right here."

"Can't be that the front's like this," said Judkins, poking
his head out between Andrews's and Chrisfield's heads so that the
bristles of his unshaven chin rubbed against Chrisfield's cheek.
It was a large square head with closely cropped light hair and
porcelain-blue eyes under lids that showed white in the red
sunburned face, and a square jaw made a little grey by the
sprouting beard.

"Say, Andy, how the hell long have we all been in this goddam
train?... Ah've done lost track o' the time...."

"What's the matter; are you gettin' old, Chris?" asked Judkins
laughing.

Chrisfield had slipped out of the place he held and began poking
himself in between Andrews and Judkins.

"We've been on this train four days and five nights, an' we've got
half a day's rations left, so we must be getting somewhere," said
Andrews.

"It can't be like this at the front."

"It must be spring there as well as here," said Andrews.

It was a day of fluffy mauve-tinted clouds that moved across the
sky, sometimes darkening to deep blue where a small rainstorm
trailed across the hills, sometimes brightening to moments of
clear sunlight that gave blue shadows to the poplars and shone
yellow on the smoke of the engine that puffed on painfully at the
head of the long train.

"Funny, ain't it? How li'l everythin' is," said Chrisfield. "Out
Indiana way we wouldn't look at a cornfield that size. But it sort
o' reminds me the way it used to be out home in the spring o' the
year."

"I'd like to see Indiana in the springtime," said Andrews.

"Well you'll come out when the war's over and us guys is all
home...won't you, Andy?"

"You bet I will."

They were going into the suburbs of a town. Rows and clusters of
little brick and stucco houses were appearing along the roads. It
began to rain from a sky full of lights of amber and lilac color.
The slate roofs and the pinkish-grey streets of the town shone
cheerfully in the rain. The little patches of garden were all
vivid emerald-green. Then they were looking at rows and rows of
red chimney pots over wet slate roofs that reflected the bright
sky. In the distance rose the purple-grey spire of a church and
the irregular forms of old buildings. They passed through a
station.

"Dijon," read Andrews. On the platform were French soldiers in
their blue coats and a good sprinkling of civilians.

"Gee, those are about the first real civies I've seen since I came
overseas," said Judkins. "Those goddam country people down at
Polignac didn't look like real civilians. There's folks dressed
like it was New York."

They had left the station and were rumbling slowly past
interminable freight trains. At last the train came to a dead
stop.

A whistle sounded.

"Don't nobody get out," shouted the sergeant from the car ahead.

"Hell! They keep you in this goddam car like you was a convict,"
muttered Chrisfield.

"I'd like to get out and walk around Dijon."

"O boy!"

"I swear I'd make a bee line for a dairy lunch," said Judkins.

"Hell of a fine dairy lunch you'll find among those goddam frogs.
No, vin blank is all you'ld get in that goddam town."

"Ah'm goin' to sleep," said Chrisfield. He stretched himself out
on the pile of equipment at the end of the car. Andrews sat down
near him and stared at his mud-caked boots, running one of his
long hands, as brown as Chrisfield's now, through his light short-
cut hair.

Chrisfield lay looking at the gaunt outline of Andrews's face
against the light through half-closed eyes. And he felt a warm
sort of a smile inside him as he said to himself: "He's a damn
good kid." Then he thought of the spring in the hills of southern
Indiana and the mocking-bird singing in the moonlight among the
flowering locust trees behind the house. He could almost smell the
heavy sweetness of the locust blooms, as he used to smell them
sitting on the steps after supper, tired from a day's heavy
plowing, while the clatter of his mother's housework came from the
kitchen. He didn't wish he was back there, but it was pleasant to
think of it now and then, and how the yellow farmhouse looked and
the red barn where his father never had been able to find time to
paint the door, and the tumble-down cowshed where the shingles
were always coming off. He wondered dully what it would be like
out there at the front. It couldn't be green and pleasant, the way
the country was here. Fellows always said it was hell out there.
Well, he didn't give a damn. He went to sleep.

He woke up gradually, the warm comfort of sleep giving place
slowly to the stiffness of his uncomfortable position with the
hobnails of a boot from the back of a pack sticking into his
shoulder. Andrews was sitting in the same position, lost in
thought. The rest of the men sat at the open doors or sprawled
over the equipment.

Chrisfield got up, stretched himself, yawned, and went to the door
to look out. There was a heavy important step on the gravel
outside. A large man with black eyebrows that met over his nose
and a very black stubbly beard passed the car. There were a
sergeants stripes on his arm.

"Say, Andy," cried Chrisfield, "that bastard is a sergeant."

"Who's that?" asked Andrews getting up with a smile, his blue eyes
looking mildly into Chrisfield's black ones.

"You know who Ah mean."

Under their heavy tan Chrisfield's rounded cheeks were
flushed. His eyes snapped under their long black lashes. His fists
were clutched.

"Oh, I know, Chris. I didn't know he was in this regiment."

"God damn him!" muttered Chrisfield in a low voice, throwing
himself down on his packs again.

"Hold your horses, Chris," said Andrews. "We may all cash in our
checks before long...no use letting things worry us."

"I don't give a damn if we do."

"Nor do I, now." Andrews sat down beside Chrisfield again.

After a while the train got jerkily into motion. The wheels
rumbled and clattered over the rails and the clots of mud bounced
up and down on the splintered boards of the floor. Chrisfield
pillowed his head on his arm and went to sleep again, still
smarting from the flush of his anger.

Andrews looked out through his fingers at the swaying black box
car, at the men sprawled about on the floor, their heads nodding
with each jolt, and at the mauve-grey clouds and bits of sparkling
blue sky that he could see behind the silhouettes of the heads and
shoulders of the men who stood in the doors. The wheels ground on
endlessly.



The car stopped with a jerk that woke up all the sleepers and
threw one man off his feet. A whistle blew shrilly outside.

"All right, out of the cars! Snap it up; snap it up!" yelled the
sergeant.

The men piled out stiffly, handing the equipment out from hand to
hand till it formed a confused heap of packs and rifles outside.
All down the train at each door there was a confused pile of
equipment and struggling men.

"Snap it up.... Full equipment.... Line up!" the sergeant yelled.

The men fell into line slowly, with their packs and rifles.
Lieutenants hovered about the edges of the forming lines, tightly
belted into their stiff trench coats, scrambling up and down the
coal piles of the siding. The men were given "at ease" and stood
leaning on their rifles staring at a green water-tank on three
wooden legs, over the top of which had been thrown a huge piece of
torn grey cheesecloth. When the confused sound of tramping feet
subsided, they could hear a noise in the distance, like someone
lazily shaking a piece of heavy sheet-iron. The sky was full of
little dabs of red, purple and yellow and the purplish sunset
light was over everything.

The order came to march. They marched down a rutted road where the
puddles were so deep they had continually to break ranks to avoid
them. In a little pine-wood on one side were rows of heavy motor
trucks and ammunition caissons; supper was cooking in a field
kitchen about which clustered the truck drivers in their wide
visored caps. Beyond the wood the column turned off into a field
behind a little group of stone and stucco houses that had lost
their roofs. In the field they halted. The grass was brilliant
emerald and the wood and the distant hills were shades of clear
deep blue. Wisps of pale-blue mist lay across the field. In the
turf here and there were small clean bites, that might have been
made by some strange animal. The men looked at them curiously.

"No lights, remember we're in sight of the enemy. A match might
annihilate the detachment," announced the lieutenant dramatically
after having given the orders for the pup tents to be set up.

When the tents were ready, the men stood about in the chilly white
mist that kept growing denser, eating their cold rations.
Everywhere were grumbling snorting voices.

"God, let's turn in, Chris, before our bones are frozen," said
Andrews.

Guards had been posted and walked up and down with a business-like
stride, peering now and then suspiciously into the little wood
where the truck-drivers were.

Chrisfield and Andrews crawled into their little tent and rolled
up together in their blankets, getting as close to each other as
they could. At first it was very cold and hard, and they squirmed
about restlessly, but gradually the warmth from their bodies
filled their thin blankets and their muscles began to relax.
Andrews went to sleep first and Chrisfield lay listening to his
deep breathing. There was a frown on his face. He was thinking of
the man who had walked past the train at Dijon. The last time he
had seen that man Anderson was at training camp. He had only been
a corporal then. He remembered the day the man had been made
corporal. It had not been long before that that Chrisfield had
drawn his knife on him, one night in the barracks. A fellow had
caught his hand just in time. Anderson had looked a bit pale that
time and had walked away. But he'd never spoken a word to
Chrisfield since. As he lay with his eyes closed, pressed close
against Andrew's limp  sleeping body, Chrisfield could see the
man's face, the eyebrows that joined across the nose and the jaw,
always blackish from the heavy beard, that looked blue when he had
just shaved. At last the tenseness of his mind slackened; he
thought of women for a moment, of a fair-haired girl he'd seen
from the tram, and then suddenly crushing sleepiness closed down
on him and everything went softly warmly black, as he drifted off
to sleep with no sense but the coldness of one side and the warmth
of his bunkie's body on the other.

In the middle of the night he awoke and crawled out of the tent.
Andrews followed him. Their teeth chattered a little, and they
stretched their legs stiffly. It was cold, but the mist had
vanished. The stars shone brilliantly. They walked out a little
way into the field away from the bunch of tents to make water. A
faint rustling and breathing noise, as of animals. herded
together, came from the sleeping regiment. Somewhere a brook made
a shrill gurgling. They strained their ears, but they could hear
no guns. They stood side by side looking up at the multitudes of
stars.

"That's Orion," said Andrews.

"What?"

"That bunch of stars there is called Orion. D'you see 'em. It's
supposed to look like a man with a bow, but he always looks to me
like a fellow striding across the sky."

"Some stars tonight, ain't there? Gee, what's that?"

Behind the dark hills a glow rose and fell like the glow in a
forge.

"The front must be that way," said Andrews, shivering. "I guess
we'll know tomorrow."

"Yes; tomorrow night we'll know more about it," said Andrews.
They stood silent a moment listening to the noise the brook made.

"God, it's quiet, ain't it? This can't be the front. Smell that?"

"What is it?"

"Smells like an apple tree in bloom somewhere.... Hell, let's git
in, before our blankets git cold."

Andrews was still staring at the group of stars he had said was
Orion.

Chrisfield pulled him by the arm. They crawled into their tent
again, rolled up together and immediately were crushed under an
exhausted sleep.



As far ahead of him as Chrisfield could see were packs and heads
with caps at a variety of angles, all bobbing up and down with the
swing of the brisk marching time. A fine warm rain was falling,
mingling with the sweat that ran down his face. The column had
been marching a long time along a straight road that was worn and
scarred with heavy traffic. Fields and hedges where clusters of
yellow flowers were in bloom had given place to an avenue of
poplars. The light wet trunks and the stiff branches hazy with
green filed by, interminable, as interminable as the confused
tramp of feet and jingle of equipment that sounded in his ears.

"Say, are we goin' towards the front?"

"Goddamned if I know."

"Ain't no front within miles."

Men's sentences came shortly through their heavy breathing.

The column shifted over to the side of the road to avoid a train
of motor trucks going the other way. Chrisfield felt the heavy mud
spurt up over him as truck after truck rumbled by. With the wet
back of one hand he tried to wipe it off his face, but the grit,
when he rubbed it, hurt his skin, made tender by the rain. He
swore long and whiningly, half aloud. His rifle felt as heavy as
an iron girder.

They entered a village of plaster-and-timber houses. Through  open
doors they could see into comfortable kitchens where copper pots
gleamed and where the floors were of clean red tiles. In front of
some of the houses were little gardens full of crocuses and
hyacinths where box-bushes shone a very dark green in the rain.
They marched through the square with its pavement of little yellow
rounded cobbles, its grey church with a pointed arch in the door,
its cafes with names painted over them. Men and women looked out
of doors and windows. The column perceptibly slackened its speed,
but kept on, and as the houses dwindled and became farther apart
along the road the men's hope of stopping vanished. Ears were
deafened by the confused tramp of feet on the macadam road. Men's
feet seemed as lead, as if all the weight of the pack hung on
them. Shoulders, worn callous, began to grow tender and sore under
the constant sweating. Heads drooped. Each man's eyes were on the
heels of the man ahead of him that rose and fell, rose and fell
endlessly. Marching became for each man a personal struggle with
his pack, that seemed to have come alive, that seemed something
malicious and overpowering, wrestling to throw him.

The rain stopped and the sky brightened a little, taking on pale
yellowish lights as if the clouds that hid the sun were growing
thin.

The column halted at the edge of a group of farms and barns that
scattered along the road. The men sprawled in all directions along
the roadside hiding the bright green grass with the mud-color of
their uniforms.

Chrisfield lay in the field beside the road, pressing his hot face
into the wet sprouting clover. The blood throbbed through his
ears. His arms and legs seemed to cleave to the ground, as if he
would never be able to move them again. He closed his eyes.
Gradually a cold chill began stealing through his body. He sat up
and slipped his arms out of the harness of his pack. Someone was
handing him a cigarette, and he sniffed a little acrid sweet
smoke.

Andrews was lying beside him, his head propped against his pack,
smoking, and poking a cigarette towards his friend with a muddy
hand. His blue eyes looked strangely from out the flaming red of
his mud-splotched face.

Chrisfield took the cigarette, and fumbled in his pocket for a
match.

"That nearly did it for me," said Andrews.

Chrisfield grunted. He pulled greedily on the cigarette.

A whistle blew.

Slowly the men dragged themselves off the ground and fell into
line, drooping under the weight of their equipment.

The companies marched off separately.

Chrisfield overheard the lieutenant saying to a sergeant:

"Damn fool business that. Why the hell couldn't they have sent us
here in the first place?"

"So we ain't goin' to the front after all?" said the sergeant.

"Front, hell!" said the lieutenant. The lieutenant was a small man
who looked like a jockey with a coarse red face which, now that he
was angry, was almost purple.

"I guess they're going to quarter us here," said somebody.

Immediately everybody began saying: "We're going to be quartered
here."

They stood waiting in formation a long while, the packs cutting
into their backs and shoulders. At last the sergeant shouted out:

"All right, take yer stuff upstairs." Stumbling on each others'
heels they climbed up into a dark loft, where the air was heavy
with the smell of hay and with an acridity of cow manure from the
stables below. There was a little straw in the corners, on which
those who got there first spread their blankets.

Chrisfield and Andrews tucked themselves in a corner from which
through a hole where the tiles had fallen off the roof, they could
see down into the barnyard, where white and speckled chickens
pecked about with jerky movements. A middle-aged woman stood in
the doorway of the house looking suspiciously at the files of
khaki-clad soldiers that shuffled slowly into the barns by every
door.

An officer went up to her, a little red book in his hand. A
conversation about some matter proceeded painfully. The officer
grew very red. Andrews threw back his head and laughed,
luxuriously rolling from side to side in the straw. Chrisfield
laughed too, he hardly knew why. Over their heads they could hear
the feet of pigeons on the roof, and a constant drowsy rou-cou-
cou-cou.

Through the barnyard smells began to drift...the greasiness of
food cooking in the field kitchen.

"Ah hope they give us somethin' good to eat," said Chrisfield.
"Ah'm hongry as a thrasher."

"So am I," said Andrews.

"Say, Andy, you kin talk their language a li'l', can't ye?"

Andrews nodded his head vaguely.

"Well, maybe we kin git some aigs or somethin' out of the lady
down there. Will ye try after mess?"

"All right."

They both lay back in the straw and closed their eyes. Their
cheeks still burned from the rain. Everything seemed very
peaceful; the men sprawled about talking in low drowsy voices.
Outside, another shower had come up and beat softly on the tiles
of the roof. Chrisfield thought he had never been so comfortable
in his life, although his soaked shoes pinched his cold feet and
his knees were wet and cold. But in the drowsiness of the rain and
of voices talking quietly about him, he fell asleep.

He dreamed he was home in Indiana, but instead of his mother
cooking at the stove in the kitchen, there was the Frenchwoman who
had stood in the farmhouse door, and near her stood a lieutenant
with a little red book in his hand. He was eating cornbread and
syrup off a broken plate. It was fine cornbread with a great deal
of crust on it, crisp and hot, on which the butter was cold and
sweet to his tongue. Suddenly he stopped eating and started
swearing, shouting at the top of his lungs: "You goddam..." he
started, but he couldn't seem to think of anything more to say.
"You goddam..." he started again. The lieutenant looked towards
him, wrinkling his black eyebrows that met across his nose. He was
Sergeant Anderson. Chris drew his knife and ran at him, but it was
Andy his bunkie he had run his knife into. He threw his arms round
Andy's body, crying hot tears.... He woke up. Mess kits were
clinking all about the dark crowded loft. The men had already
started piling down the stairs.



The larks filled the wine-tinged air with a constant chiming of
little bells. Chrisfield and Andrews were strolling across a field
of white clover that covered the brow of a hill. Below in the
valley they could see a cluster of red roofs of farms and the
white ribbon of the road where long trains of motor trucks crawled
like beetles. The sun had just set behind the blue hills the other
side of the shallow valley. The air was full of the smell of
clover and of hawthorn from the hedgerows. They took deep breaths
as they crossed the field.

"It's great to get away from that crowd," Andrews was saying.

Chrisfield walked on silently, dragging his feet through the
matted clover. A leaden dullness weighed like some sort of warm
choking coverlet on his limbs, so that it seemed an effort to
walk, an effort to speak. Yet under it his muscles were taut and
trembling as he had known them to be before when he was about to
get into a fight or to make love to a girl.

"Why the hell don't they let us git into it?" he said suddenly.

"Yes, anything'ld be better than this...wait, wait, wait."

They walked on, hearing the constant chirrup of the larks, the
brush of their feet through the clover, the faint jingle of some
coins in Chrisfield's pocket, and in the distance the irregular
snoring of an aeroplane motor. As they walked Andrews leaned over
from time to time and picked a couple of the white clover flowers.

The aeroplane came suddenly nearer and swooped in a wide curve
above the field, drowning every sound in the roar of its exhaust.
They made out the figures of the  pilot and the observer before
the plane rose again and vanished against the ragged purple clouds
of the sky. The observer had waved a hand at them as he passed.
They stood still in the darkening field, staring up at the sky,
where a few larks still hung chirruping.

"Ah'd lahk to be one o' them guys," said Chrisfield.

"You would?"

"God damn it, Ah'd do anything to git out o' this hellish
infantry. This ain't no sort o' life for a man to be treated lahk
he was a nigger."

"No, it's no sort of life for a man."

"If they'd let us git to the front an' do some fightin' an' be
done with it.... But all we do is drill and have grenade practice
an' drill again and then have bayonet practice an' drill again.
'Nough to drive a feller crazy."

"What the hell's the use of talking about it, Chris? We can't be
any lower than we are, can we?" Andrews laughed.

"There's that plane again."

"Where?"

"There, just goin' down behind the piece o' woods."

"That's where their field is."

"Ah bet them guys has a good time. Ah put in an application back
in trainin' camp for Aviation. Ain't never heard nothing from it
though. If Ah had, Ah wouldn't be lower than dirt in this hawg-
pen."

"It's wonderful up here on the hill this evening," said Andrews,
looking dreamily at the pale orange band of light where the sun
had set. "Let's go down and get a bottle of wine."

"Now yo're talkin'. Ah wonder if that girl's down there tonight."

"Antoinette?"

"Um-hum.... Boy, Ah'd lahk to have her all by ma-self some night."

Their steps grew brisker as they strode along a grass-grown road
that led through high hedgerows to a village under the brow of the
hill. It was almost dark under the shadow of the bushes on either
side. Overhead the purple clouds were washed over by a pale yellow
light that gradually faded to grey. Birds chirped and rustled
among the young leaves.

Andrews put his hand on Chrisfield's shoulder.

"Let's walk slow," he said, "we don't want to get out of here too
soon." He grabbed carelessly at little cluster of hawthorn flowers
as he passed them, and seemed reluctant to untangle the thorny
branches that caught in his coat and on his loosely wound puttees.

"Hell, man," said Chrisfield, "we won't have time to get a
bellyful. It must be gettin' late already."

They hastened their steps again and came in a moment to the first
tightly shuttered houses of the village.

In the middle of the road was an M.P., who stood with his legs
wide apart, waving his "billy" languidly. He had a red face, his
eyes were fixed on the shuttered upper window of a house, through
the chinks of which came a few streaks of yellow light. His lips
were puckered up as if to whistle, but no sound came. He swayed
back and forth indecisively. An officer came suddenly out of the
little green door of the house in front of the M.P., who brought
his heels together with a jump and saluted, holding his hand a
long while to his cap. The officer flicked a hand up hastily to
his hat, snatching his cigar out of his mouth for an instant. As
the officer's steps grew fainter down the road, the M.P. gradually
returned to his former position.

Chrisfield and Andrews had slipped by on the other side, and gone
in at the door of a small ramshackle house of which the windows
were closed by heavy wooden shutters.

"I bet there ain't many of them bastards at the front," said
Chris.

"Not many of either kind of bastards," said Andrews laughing, as
he closed the door behind them. They were in a room that had once
been the parlor of a farmhouse. The chandelier with its bits of
crystal and the orange-blossoms on a piece of dusty red velvet
under a bell glass on the mantelpiece denoted that. The furniture
had been taken out, and four square oak tables crowded in. At one
of the tables sat three Americans and at another a very young
olive-skinned French soldier, who sat hunched over his table
looking moodily down into his glass of wine.

A girl in a faded frock of some purplish material that showed the
strong curves of her shoulders and breasts slouched into the room,
her hands in the pocket of a dark blue apron against which her
rounded forearms showed golden brown. Her face had the same golden
tan under a mass of dark blonde hair. She smiled when she saw the
two soldiers, drawing her thin lips away from her ugly yellow
teeth.

"Ca va bien, Antoinette?" asked Andrews.

"Oui," she said, looking beyond their heads at the French soldier
who sat at the other side of the little room.

"A bottle of vin rouge, vite," said Chrisfield.

"Ye needn't be so damn vite about it tonight, Chris," said one of
the men at the other table.

"Why?"

"Ain't a-goin' to be no roll call. Corporal tole me his-self.
Sarge's gone out to git stewed, an' the Loot's away."

"Sure," said another man, "we kin stay out as late's we goddam
please tonight."

"There's a new M.P. in town," said Chrisfield.... "Ah saw him
maself.... You did, too, didn't you, Andy?"

Andrews nodded. He was looking at the Frenchman, who sat with his
face in shadow and his black lashes covering his eyes. A purplish
flash had suffused the olive skin at his cheekbones.

"Oh, boy," said Chrisfield. "That ole wine sure do go down
fast.... Say, Antoinette, got any cognac?"

"I'm going to have some more wine," said Andrews.

"Go ahead, Andy; have all ye want. Ah want some-thin' to warm ma
guts."

Antoinette brought a bottle of cognac and two small glasses and
sat down in an empty chair with her red hands crossed on her
apron. Her eyes moved from Chrisfield to the Frenchman and back
again.

Chrisfield turned a little round in his chair and looked at the
Frenchman, feeling in his eyes for a moment a glance of the man's
yellowish-brown eyes.

Andrews leaned back against the wall sipping his dark-colored
wine, his eyes contracted dreamily, fixed on the shadow of the
chandelier, which the cheap oil-lamp with its tin reflector cast
on the peeling plaster of the wall opposite.

Chrisfield punched him.

"Wake up, Andy, are you asleep?"

"No," said Andy smiling.

"Have a li'l mo' cognac."

Chrisfield poured out two more glasses unsteadily. His eyes were
on Antoinette again. The faded purple frock was hooked at the
neck. The first three hooks were undone revealing a V-shape of
golden brown skin and a bit of whitish underwear.

"Say, Andy," he said, putting his arm round his friend's neck and
talking into his ear, "talk up to her for me, will yer, Andy?...
Ah won't let that goddam frog get her, no, I won't, by Gawd. Talk
up to her for me, Andy."

Andrews laughed.

"I'll try," he said. "But there's always the Queen of Sheba,
Chris."

"Antoinette, j'ai un ami," started Andrews, making a gesture with
a long dirty hand towards Chris.

Antoinette showed her bad teeth in a smile.

"Joli garcon," said Andrews.

Antoinette's face became impassive and beautiful again. Chrisfield
leaned back in his chair with an empty glass in his hand and
watched his friend admiringly.

"Antoinette, mon ami vous...vous admire," said Andrews in a
courtly voice.

A woman put her head in the door. It was the same face and hair as
Antoinette's, ten years older, only the skin, instead of being
golden brown, was sallow and wrinkled.

"Viens," said the woman in a shrill voice.

Antoinette got up, brushed heavily against Chrisfield's leg as she
passed him and disappeared. The Frenchman walked across the room
from his corner, saluted gravely and went out.

Chrisfield jumped to his feet. The room was like a white box
reeling about him.

"That frog's gone after her," he shouted.

"No, he ain't, Chris," cried someone from the next table. "Sit
tight, ole boy. We're bettin' on yer."

"Yes, sit down and have a drink, Chris," said Andy. "I've got to
have somethin' more to drink. I haven't had a thing to drink all
the evening." He pulled him back into his chair. Chrisfield tried
to get up again. Andrews hung on him so that the chair upset. Then
both sprawled on the red tiles of the floor.

"The house is pinched!" said a voice.

Chrisfield saw Judkins standing over him, a grin on his large red
face. He got to his feet and sat sulkily in his chair again.
Andrews was already sitting opposite him, looking impassive as
ever.

The tables were full now. Someone was singing in a droning voice.

"O the oak and the ash and the weeping willow tree,
 O green grows the grass in God's countree!"

"Ole Indiana," shouted Chris. "That's the only God's country I
know." He suddenly felt that he could tell Andy all about his home
and the wide corn-fields shimmering and rustling under the July
sun, and the creek with red clay banks where he used to go in
swimming. He seemed to see it all before him, to smell the winey
smell of the silo, to see the cattle, with their chewing mouths
always stained a little with green, waiting to get through the
gate to the water trough, and the yellow dust and roar of wheat-
thrashing, and the quiet evening breeze cooling his throat and
neck when he lay out on a shack of hay that he had been tossing
all day long under the tingling sun. But all he managed to say
was:

"Indiana's God's country, ain't it, Andy?"

"Oh, he has so many," muttered Andrews.

"Ah've seen a hailstone measured nine inches around out home,
honest to Gawd, Ah have."

"Must be as good as a barrage."

"Ah'd like to see any goddam barrage do the damage one of our
thunder an' lightnin' storms'll do," shouted Chris.

"I guess all the barrage we're going to see's grenade practice."

"Don't you worry, buddy," said somebody across the room.

"You'll see enough of it. This war's going to last damn long...."

"Ah'd lak to get in some licks at those Huns tonight; honest to
Gawd Ah would, Andy," muttered Chris in a low voice. He felt his
muscles contract with a furious irritation. He looked through
half-closed eyes at the men in the room, seeing them in distorted
white lights and reddish shadows. He thought of himself throwing a
grenade among a crowd of men. Then he saw the face of Anderson, a
ponderous white face with eyebrows that met across his nose and a
bluish, shaved chin.

"Where does he stay at, Andy? I'm going to git him."

Andrews guessed what he meant.

"Sit down and have a drink, Chris," he said, "Remember you're
going to sleep with the Queen of Sheba tonight."

"Not if I can't git them goddam...." his voice trailed off into an
inaudible muttering of oaths.

"O the oak and the ash and the weeping willow tree,
 O green grows the grass in God's countree!"

somebody sang again.

Chrisfield saw a woman standing beside the table with her back to
him, collecting the bottles. Andy was paying her.

"Antoinette," he said. He got to his feet and put his arms round
her shoulders. With a quick movement of the elbows she pushed him
back into his chair. She turned round. He saw the sallow face and
thin breasts of the older sister. She looked in his eyes with
surprise. He was grinning drunkenly. As she left the room she made
a sign to him with her head to follow her. He got up and staggered
out the door, pulling Andrews after him.

In the inner room was a big bed with curtains where the women
slept, and the fireplace where they did their cooking. It was dark
except for the corner where he and Andrews stood blinking in the
glare of a candle on the table. Beyond they could only see ruddy
shadows and the huge curtained bed with its red coverlet.

The Frenchman, somewhere in the dark of the room, said something
several times.

"Avions boches...ss-t!"

They were quiet.

Above them they heard the snoring of aeroplane motors, rising and
falling like the buzzing of a fly against a window pane.

They all looked at each other curiously. Antoinette was leaning
against the bed, her face expressionless. Her heavy hair had come
undone and fell in smoky gold waves about her shoulders.

The older woman was giggling.

"Come on, let's see what's doing, Chris," said Andrews.

They went out into the dark village street.

"To hell with women, Chris, this is the war!" cried Andrews in a
loud drunken voice as they reeled arm in arm up the street.

"You bet it's the war.... Ah'm a-goin' to beat up...."

Chrisfield felt his friend's hand clapped over his mouth. He let
himself go limply, feeling himself pushed to the side of the road.

Somewhere in the dark he heard an officer's voice say:

"Bring those men to me."

"Yes, sir," came another voice.

Slow heavy footsteps came up the road in their direction. Andrews
kept pushing him back along the side of a house, until suddenly
they both fell sprawling in a manure pit.

"Lie still for God's sake," muttered Andrews, throwing an arm over
Chrisfield's chest. A thick odor of dry manure filled their
nostrils.

They heard the steps come nearer, wander about irresolutely and
then go off in the direction from which they had come.

Meanwhile the throb of motors overhead grew louder and louder.

"Well?" came the officer's voice.

"Couldn't find them, sir," mumbled the other voice.

"Nonsense. Those men were drunk," came the officer's voice.

"Yes, sir," came the other voice humbly.

Chrisfield started to giggle. He felt he must yell aloud with
laughter.

The nearest motor stopped its singsong roar, making the night seem
deathly silent.

Andrews jumped to his feet.

The air was split by a shriek followed by a racking snorting
explosion. They saw the wall above their pit light up with a red
momentary glare.

Chrisfield got to his feet, expecting to see flaming ruins. The
village street was the same as ever. There was a little light from
the glow the moon, still under the horizon, gave to the sky. A
window in the house opposite showed yellow. In it was a blue
silhouette of an officer's cap and uniform.

A little group stood in the street below.

"What was that?" the form in the window was shouting in a
peremptory voice.

"German aeroplane just dropped a bomb, Major," came a breathless
voice in reply.

"Why the devil don't he close that window?" a voice was muttering
all the while. "Juss a target for 'em to aim at...a target to aim
at."

"Any damage done?" asked the major.

Through the silence the snoring of the motors sing-songed
ominously overhead, like giant mosquitoes.

"I seem to hear more," said the major, in his drawling voice.

"O yes sir, yes sir, lots," answered an eager voice.

"For God's sake tell him to close the window, Lieutenant,"
muttered another voice.

"How the hell can I tell him? You tell him."

"We'll all be killed, that's all there is about it."

"There are no shelters or dugouts," drawled the major from the
window. "That's Headquarters' fault."

"There's the cellar!" cried the eager voice, again.

"Oh," said the major.

Three snorting explosions in quick succession drowned everything
in a red glare. The street was suddenly filled with a scuttle of
villagers running to shelter.

"Say, Andy, they may have a roll call," said Chrisfield.

"We'd better cut for home across country," said Andrews.

They climbed cautiously out of their manure pit. Chrisfield was
surprised to find that he was trembling. His hands were cold.

It was with difficulty he kept his teeth from chattering.

"God, we'll stink for a week."

"Let's git out," muttered Chrisfield, "o' this goddam village."

They ran out through an orchard, broke through a hedge and climbed
up the hill across the open fields.

Down the main road an anti-aircraft gun had started barking and
the sky sparkled with exploding shrapnel. The "put, put, put" of a
machine gun had begun somewhere. Chrisfield strode up the hill in
step with his friend. Behind them bomb followed bomb, and above
them the air seemed full of exploding shrapnel and droning planes.
The cognac still throbbed a little in their blood. They stumbled
against each other now and then as they walked. From the top of
the hill they turned and looked back. Chrisfield felt a tremendous
elation thumping stronger than the cognac through his veins.
Unconsciously he put his arm round his friend's shoulders. They
seemed the only live things in a reeling world.

Below in the valley a house was burning brightly. From all
directions came the yelp of anti-aircraft guns, and overhead
unperturbed continued the leisurely singsong of the motors.

Suddenly Chrisfield burst out laughing. "By God, Ah always have
fun when Ah'm out with you, Andy," he said.

They turned and hurried down the other slope of the hill towards
the farms where they were quartered.



                             II

As far as he could see in every direction were the grey trunks of
beeches bright green with moss on one side. The ground was thick
with last year's leaves that rustled maddeningly with every step.
In front of him his eyes followed other patches of olive-drab
moving among the tree trunks. Overhead, through the mottled light
and dark green of the leaves he could see now and then a patch of
heavy grey sky, greyer than the silvery trunks that moved about
him in every direction as he walked. He strained his eyes down
each alley until they were dazzled by the reiteration of mottled
grey and green. Now and then the rustling stopped ahead of him,
and the olive-drab patches were still. Then, above the clamour of
the blood in his ears, he could hear batteries "pong, pong, pong"
in the distance, and the woods ringing with a sound like hail as a
heavy shell hurtled above the tree tops to end in a dull rumble
miles away.

Chrisfield was soaked with sweat, but he could not feel his arms
or legs. Every sense was concentrated in eyes and ears, and in the
consciousness of his gun. Time and again he pictured himself
taking sight at something grey that moved, and firing. His
forefinger itched to press the trigger. He would take aim very
carefully, he told himself; he pictured a dab of grey starting up
from behind a grey tree trunk, and the sharp detonation of his
rifle, and the dab of grey rolling among the last year's leaves.

A branch carried his helmet off his head so that it rolled at his
feet and bounced with a faint metallic sound against the root of a
tree.

He was blinded by the sudden terror that seized him. His heart
seemed to roll from side to side in his chest. He stood stiff, as
if paralyzed for a moment before he could stoop and pick the
helmet up. There was a curious taste of blood in his mouth.

"Ah'll pay 'em fer that," he muttered between clenched teeth.

His fingers were still trembling when he stooped to pick up the
helmet, which he put on again very carefully, fastening it with
the strap under his chin. Furious anger had taken hold of him. The
olive-drab patches ahead had moved forward again. He followed,
looking eagerly to the right and the left, praying he might see
something. In every direction were the silvery trunk of the
beeches, each with a vivid green streak on one side. With every
step the last year's russet leaves rustled underfoot, maddeningly
loud.

Almost out of sight among the moving tree trunks was a log. It was
not a log; it was a bunch of grey-green cloth. Without thinking
Chrisfield strode towards it. The silver trunks of the beeches
circled about him, waving jagged arms. It was a German lying full
length among the leaves.

Chrisfield was furiously happy in the angry pumping of blood
through his veins.

He could see the buttons on the back of the long coat of the
German, and the red band on his cap.

He kicked the German. He could feel the ribs against his toes
through the leather of his boot. He kicked again and again with
all his might. The German rolled over heavily. He had no face.
Chrisfield felt the hatred suddenly ebb out of him. Where the face
had been was a spongy mass of purple and yellow and red, half of
which stuck to the russet leaves when the body rolled over. Large
flies with bright shiny green bodies circled about it. In a brown
clay-grimed hand was a revolver.

Chrisfield felt his spine go cold; the German had shot himself.

He ran off suddenly, breathlessly, to join the rest of the
reconnoitering squad. The silent beeches whirled about him, waving
gnarled boughs above his head. The German had shot himself. That
was why he had no face.

Chrisfield fell into line behind the other men. The corporal
waited for him.

"See anything?" he asked.

"Not a goddam thing," muttered Chrisfield almost inaudibly.
The corporal went off to the head of the line. Chrisfield was
alone again. The leaves rustled maddeningly loud underfoot.



                            III

Chrisfield's eyes were fixed on the leaves at the tops of the
walnut trees, etched like metal against the bright colorless sky,
edged with flicks and fringes of gold where the sunlight struck
them. He stood stiff and motionless at attention, although there
was a sharp pain in his left ankle that seemed swollen enough to
burst the worn boot. He could feel the presence of men on both
sides of him, and of men again beyond them. It seemed as if the
stiff line of men in olive-drab, standing at attention, waiting
endlessly for someone to release them from their erect paralysis,
must stretch unbroken round the world. He let his glance fall to
the trampled grass of the field where the regiment was drawn up.
Somewhere behind him he could hear the clinking of spurs at some
officer's heels. Then there was the sound of a motor on the road
suddenly shut off, and there were steps coming down the line of
men, and a group of officers passed hurriedly, with a business-
like stride, as if they did nothing else all their lives.
Chrisfield made out eagles on tight khaki shoulders, then a single
star and a double star, above which was a red ear and some grey
hair; the general passed too soon for him to make out his face.
Chrisfield swore to himself a little because his ankle hurt so.
His eyes travelled back to the fringe of the trees against the
bright sky. So this was what he got for those weeks in dugouts,
for all the times he had thrown himself on his belly in the mud,
for the bullets he had shot into the unknown at grey specks that
moved among the grey mud. Something was crawling up the middle of
his back. He wasn't sure if it were a louse or if he were
imagining it. An order had been shouted. Automatically he had
changed his position to parade rest. Somewhere far away a little
man was walking towards the long drab lines. A wind had come up,
rustling the stiff leaves of the grove of walnut trees. The voice
squeaked above it, but Chrisfield could not make out what it said.
The wind in the trees made a vast rhythmic sound like the churning
of water astern of the transport he had come over on. Gold flicks
and olive shadows danced among the indented clusters of leaves as
they swayed, as if sweeping something away, against the bright
sky. An idea came into Chrisfield's head. Suppose the leaves
should sweep in broader and broader curves until they should reach
the ground and sweep and sweep until all this was swept away, all
these pains and lice and uniforms and officers with maple leaves
or eagles or single stars or double stars or triple stars on their
shoulders. He had a sudden picture of himself in his old
comfortable overalls, with his shirt open so that the wind
caressed his neck like a girl blowing down it playfully, lying on
a shuck of hay under the hot Indiana sun. Funny he'd thought all
that, he said to himself. Before he'd known Andy he'd never have
thought of that. What had come over him these days?

The regiment was marching away in columns of fours. Chrisfield's
ankle gave him sharp hot pain with every step. His tunic was too
tight and the sweat tingled on his back. All about him were
sweating irritated faces; the woollen tunics with their high
collars were like straight-jackets that hot afternoon. Chrisfield
marched with his fists clenched; he wanted to fight somebody, to
run his bayonet into a man as he ran it into the dummy in that
everlasting bayonet drill, he wanted to strip himself naked, to
squeeze the wrists of a girl until she screamed.

His company was marching past another company that was lined up to
be dismissed in front of a ruined barn which had a roof that
sagged in the middle like an old cow's back. The sergeant stood in
front of them with his arms crossed, looking critically at the
company that marched past. He had a white heavy face and black
eyebrows that met over his nose. Chrisfield stared hard at him as
he passed, but Sergeant Anderson did not seem to recognize him. It
gave him a dull angry feeling as if he'd been cut by a friend.

The company melted suddenly into a group of men unbuttoning their
shirts and tunics in front of the little board shanty where they
were quartered, which had been put up by the French at the time of
the Marne, years before, so a man had told Andy.

"What are you dreamin' about, Indiana?" said Judkins, punching
Chrisfield jovially in the ribs.

Chrisfield doubled his fists and gave him a smashing blow in the
jaw that Judkins warded of just in time.

Judkins's face flamed red. He swung with a long bent arm.

"What the hell d'you think this is?" shouted somebody. "What's he
want to hit me for?" spluttered Judkins, breathless.

Men had edged in between them.

"Lemme git at him."

"Shut up, you fool," said Andy, drawing Chrisfield away. The
company scattered sullenly. Some of the men lay down in the long
uncut grass in the shade of the ruins of the house, one of the
walls of which made a wall of the shanty where they lived.
Andrews and Chrisfield strolled in silence down the road, kicking
their feet into the deep dust. Chrisfield was limping. On both
sides of the road were fields of ripe wheat, golden under the sun.
In the distance were low green hills fading to blue, pale yellow
in patches with the ripe grain. Here and there a thick clump of
trees or a screen of poplars broke the flatness of the long smooth
hills. In the hedgerows were blue cornflowers and poppies in all
colors from carmine to orange that danced in the wind on their
wiry stalks. At the turn in the road they lost the noise of the
division and could hear the bees droning in the big dull purple
cloverheads and in the gold hearts of the daisies.

"You're a wild man, Chris. What the hell came over you to try an'
smash poor old Judkie's jaw? He could lick you anyway. He's twice
as heavy as you are."

Chrisfield walked on in silence.

"God, I should think you'ld have had enough of that sort of
thing.... I should think you'ld be sick of wanting to hurt people.
You don't like pain yourself, do you?"

Andrews spoke in spurts, bitterly, his eyes on the ground.

"Ah think Ah sprained ma goddam ankle when Ah tumbled off the back
o' the truck yesterday."

"Better go on sick call.... Say, Chris, I'm sick of this
business.... Almost like you'd rather shoot yourself than keep
on."

"Ah guess you're gettin' the dolefuls, Andy. Look...let's go in
swimmin'. There's a lake down the road."

"I've got my soap in my pocket. We can wash a few cooties off."

"Don't walk so goddam fast...Andy, you got more learnin' than I
have. You ought to be able to tell what it is makes a feller go
crazy like that.... Ah guess Ah got a bit o' the devil in me."

Andrews was brushing the soft silk of a poppy petal against his
face.

"I wonder if it'ld have any effect if I ate some of these," he
said.

"Why?"

"They say you go to sleep if you lie down in a poppy-field.
Wouldn't you like to do that, Chris, an' not wake up till the war
was over and you could be a human being again."

Andrews bit into the green seed capsule he held in his hand. A
milky juice came out.

"It's bitter...I guess it's the opium," he said.

"What's that?"

"A stuff that makes you go to sleep and have wonderful
dreams. In China...."

"Dreams," interrupted Chrisfield. "Ah had one of them last night.
Dreamed Ah saw a feller that had shot hisself that I saw one
time  reconnoitrin' out in the Bringy Wood."

"What was that?"

"Nawthin', juss a Fritzie had shot hisself."

"Better than opium," said Andrews, his voice trembling with sudden
excitement.

"Ah dreamed the flies buzzin' round him was aeroplanes....
Remember the last rest village?"

"And the major who wouldn't close the window? You bet I do!"

They lay down on the grassy bank that sloped from the road to the
pond. The road was hidden from them by the tall reeds through
which the wind lisped softly. Overhead huge white cumulus clouds,
piled tier on tier like fantastic galleons in full sail, floated,
changing slowly in a greenish sky. The reflection of clouds in the
silvery glisten of the pond's surface was broken by clumps of
grasses and bits of floating weeds. They lay on their backs for
some time before they started taking their clothes off, looking up
at the sky, that seemed vast and free, like the ocean, vaster and
freer than the ocean.

"Sarge says a delousin' machine's comin' through this way soon."

"We need it, Chris."

Andrews pulled his clothes off slowly.

"It's great to feel the sun and the wind on your body, isn't it,
Chris?"

Andrews walked towards the pond and lay flat on his belly on the
fine soft grass near the edge.

"It's great to have your body there, isn't it?" he said in a
dreamy voice. "Your skin's so soft and supple, and nothing in the
world has the feel a muscle has.... Gee, I don't know what I'd do
without my body."

Chrisfield laughed.

"Look how ma ole ankle's raised.... Found any cooties yet?" he
said.

"I'll try and drown "em," said Andrews. "Chris, come away from
those stinking uniforms and you'll feel like a human being with
the sun on your flesh instead of like a lousy soldier."

"Hello, boys," came a high-pitched voice unexpectedly. A "Y" man
with sharp nose and chin had come up behind them.

"Hello," said Chrisfield sullenly, limping towards the water.

"Want the soap?" said Andrews.

"Going to take a swim, boys?" asked the "Y" man. Then he added in
a tone of conviction, "That's great."

"Better come in, too," said Andrews.

"Thanks, thanks.... Say, if you don't mind my suggestion, why
don't you fellers get under the water.... You see there's two
French girls looking at you from the road." The "Y" man giggled
faintly.

"They don't mind," said Andrews soaping, himself vigorously.

"Ah reckon they lahk it," said Chrisfield.

"I know they haven't any morals.... But still."

"And why should they not look at us? Maybe there won't be many
people who get a chance."

"What do you mean?"

"Have you ever seen what a little splinter of a shell does to a
feller's body?" asked Andrews savagely. He splashed into the
shallow water and swam towards the middle of the pond.

"Ye might ask 'em to come down and help us pick the cooties off,"
said Chrisfield and followed in Andrews's wake. In the middle he
lay on a sand bank in the warm shallow water and looked back at
the "Y" man, who still stood on the bank. Behind him were other
men undressing, and soon the grassy slope was filled with naked
men and yellowish grey underclothes, and many dark heads and
gleaming backs were bobbing up and down in the water. When he came
out, he found Andrews sitting cross-legged near his clothes. He
reached for his shirt and drew it on him.

"God, I can't make up my mind to put the damn thing on again,"
said Andrews in a low voice, almost as if he were talking to
himself; "I feel so clean and free. It's like voluntarily taking
up filth and slavery again.... I think I'll just walk off naked
across the fields."

"D'you call serving your country slavery, my friend?" The "Y" man,
who had been roaming among the bathers, his neat uniform and well-
polished boots and puttees contrasting strangely with the mud-
clotted, sweat-soaked clothing of the men about him, sat down on
the grass beside Andrews.

"You're goddam right I do."

"You'll get into trouble, my boy, if you talk that way," said the
"Y" man in a cautious voice.

"Well, what is your definition of slavery?"

"You must remember that you are a voluntary worker in the cause of
democracy.... You're doing this so that your children will be able
to live peaceful...."

"Ever shot a man?"

"No.... No, of course not, but I'd have enlisted, really I would.
Only my eyes are weak."

"I guess so," said Andrews under his breath. "Remember that your
women folks, your sisters and sweethearts and mothers, are praying
for you at this instant."

"I wish somebody'd pray me into a clean shirt," said Andrews,
starting to get into his clothes. "How long have you been over
here?"

"Just three months." The man's sallow face, with its pinched nose
and chin lit up. "But, boys, those three months have been worth
all the other years of my min--" he caught himself--"life.... I've
heard the great heart of America beat.  O boys, never forget that
you are in a great Christian undertaking."

"Come on, Chris, let's beat it." They left the "Y" man wandering
among the men along the bank of the pond, to which the reflection
of the greenish silvery sky and the great piled white clouds gave
all the free immensity of space. From the road they could still
hear his high pitched voice.

"And that's what'll survive you and me," said Andrews.

"Say, Andy, you sure can talk to them guys," said Chris
admiringly.

"What's the use of talking? God, there's a bit of honeysuckle
still in bloom. Doesn't that smell like home to you, Chris?"

"Say, how much do they pay those 'Y' men, Andy?"

"Damned if I know."

They were just in time to fall into line for mess. In the line
everyone was talking and laughing, enlivened by the smell of food
and the tinkle of mess-kits. Near the field kitchen Chrisfield saw
Sergeant Anderson talking with Higgins, his own sergeant. They
were laughing together, and he heard Anderson's big voice saying
jovially, "We've pulled through this time, Higgins.... I guess we
will again." The two sergeants looked at each other and cast a
paternal, condescending glance over their men and laughed aloud.

Chrisfield felt powerless as an ox under the yoke. All he could do
was work and strain and stand at attention, while that white-faced
Anderson could lounge about as if he owned the earth and laugh
importantly like that. He held out his plate. The K.P. splashed
the meat and gravy into it. He leaned against the tar-papered wall
of the shack, eating his food and looking sullenly over at the two
sergeants, who laughed and talked with an air of leisure while the
men of their two companies ate hurriedly as dogs all round them.

Chrisfield glanced suddenly at Anderson, who sat in the grass at
the back of the house, looking out over the wheat fields, while
the smoke of a cigarette rose in spirals about his face and his
fair hair. He looked peaceful, almost happy. Chrisfield clenched
his fists and felt the hatred of that other man rising stingingly
within him.

"Guess Ah got a bit of the devil in me," he thought.



The windows were so near the grass that the faint light had a
greenish color in the shack where the company was quartered. It
gave men's faces, tanned as they were, the sickly look of people
who work in offices, when they lay on their blankets in the bunks
made of chicken wire, stretched across mouldy scantlings. Swallows
had made their nests in the peak of the roof, and their droppings
made white dobs and blotches on the floorboards in the alley
between the bunks, where a few patches of yellow grass had not yet
been completely crushed away by footsteps. Now that the shack was
empty, Chrisfield could hear plainly the peep-peep of the little
swallows in their mud nests. He sat quiet on the end of one of the
bunks, looking out of the open door at the blue shadows that were
beginning to lengthen on the grass of the meadow behind. His
hands, that had got to be the color of terra cotta, hung idly be-
tween his legs. He was whistling faintly. His eyes, in their long
black eyelashes, were fixed on the distance, though he was not
thinking. He felt a comfortable unexpressed well-being all over
him. It was pleasant to be alone in the barracks like this, when
the other men were out at grenade practice. There was no chance of
anyone shouting orders at him.

A warm drowsiness came over him. From the field kitchen alongside
came the voice of a man singing:

"O my girl's a lulu, every inch a lulu,
 Is Lulu, that pretty lil' girl o' mi-ine."

In their mud nests the young swallows twittered faintly overhead.
Now and then there was a beat of wings and a big swallow skimmed
into the shack. Chrisfield's cheeks began to feel very softly
flushed. His head drooped over on his chest. Outside the cook was
singing over and over again in a low voice, amid a faint clatter
of pans:

"O my girl's a lulu, every inch a lulu,
 Is Lulu, that pretty lil' girl o' mi-ine."

Chrisfield fell asleep.

He woke up with a start. The shack was almost dark. A tall man
stood out black against the bright oblong of the door.

"What are you doing here?" said a deep snarling voice.

Chrisfield's eyes blinked. Automatically he got to his feet; it
might be an officer. His eyes focussed suddenly. It was Anderson's
face that was between him and the light. In the greenish obscurity
the skin looked chalk-white in contrast to the heavy eyebrows that
met over the nose and the dark stubble on the chin.

"How is it you ain't out with the company?"

"Ah'm barracks guard," muttered Chrisfield. He could feel the
blood beating in his wrists and temples, stinging his eyes like
fire. He was staring at the floor in front of Anderson's feet.

"Orders was all the companies was to go out an' not leave any
guard."

"Ah!'

"We'll see about that when Sergeant Higgins comes in. Is this
place tidy?"

"You say Ah'm a goddamed liar, do ye?" Chrisfield felt suddenly
cool and joyous. He felt anger taking possession of him. He seemed
to be standing somewhere away from himself watching himself get
angry.

"This place has got to be cleaned up.... That damn General may
come back to look over quarters," went on Anderson coolly.

"You call me a goddam liar," said Chrisfield again, putting as
much insolence as he could summon into his voice. "Ah guess you
doan' remember me."

"Yes, I know, you're the guy tried to run a knife into me once,"
said Anderson coolly, squaring his shoulders. "I guess you've
learned a little discipline by this time. Anyhow you've got to
clean this place up. God, they haven't even brushed the birds'
nests down! Must be some company!" said Anderson with a half
laugh.

"Ah ain't agoin' to neither, fur you."

"Look here, you do it or it'll be the worse for you," shouted the
sergeant in his deep rasping voice.

"If ever Ah gits out o' the army Ah'm goin' to shoot you. You've
picked on me enough." Chrisfield spoke slowly, as coolly as
Anderson.

"Well, we'll see what a court-martial has to say to that."

"Ah doan give a hoot in hell what ye do."

Sergeant Anderson turned on his heel and went out, twisting the
corner button of his tunic in his big fingers. Already the sound
of tramping feet was heard and the shouted order, "Dis-missed."
Then men crowded into the shack, laughing and talking. Chrisfield
sat still on the end of the bunk, looking at the bright oblong of
the door. Outside he saw Anderson talking to Sergeant Higgins.
They shook hands, and Anderson disappeared. Chrisfield heard
Sergeant Higgins call after him.

"I guess the next time I see you I'll have to put my heels
together an' salute."

Andersen's booming laugh faded as he walked away.

Sergeant Higgins came into the shack and walked straight up to
Chrisfield, saying in a hard official voice:

"You're under arrest.... Small, guard this man; get your gun and
cartridge belt. I'll relieve you so you can get mess."

He went out. Everyone's eyes were turned curiously on Chrisfield.
Small, a red-faced man with a long nose that hung down over his
upper lip, shuffled sheepishly over to his place beside
Chrisfield's cot and let the butt of his rifle come down with a
bang on the floor. Somebody laughed. Andrews walked up to them, a
look of trouble in his blue eyes and in the lines of his lean
tanned cheeks.

"What's the matter, Chris?" he asked in a low voice.

"Tol'" that bastard Ah didn't give a hoot in hell what he did,"
said Chrisfield in a broken voice.

"Say, Andy, I don't think I ought ter let anybody talk to him,"
said Small in an apologetic tone. "I don't see why Sarge always
gives me all his dirty work."

Andrews walked off without replying.

"Never mind, Chris; they won't do nothin' to ye," said Jenkins,
grinning at him good-naturedly from the door.

"Ah doan give a hoot in hell what they do," said Chrisfield again.

He lay back in his bunk and looked at the ceiling. The barracks
was full of a bustle of cleaning up. Judkins was sweeping the
floor with a broom made of dry sticks. Another man was knocking
down the swallows' nests with a bayonet. The mud nests crumbled
and fell on the floor and the bunks, filling the air with a
flutter of feathers and a smell of birdlime. The little naked
bodies, with their orange bills too big for them, gave a soft
plump when they hit the boards of the floor, where they lay giving
faint gasping squeaks. Meanwhile, with shrill little cries, the
big swallows flew back and forth in the shanty, now and then
striking the low roof.

"Say, pick 'em up, can't yer?" said Small. Judkins was sweeping
the little gasping bodies out among the dust and dirt.

A stoutish man stooped and picked the little birds up one by one,
puckering his lips into an expression of tenderness. He made his
two hands into a nest-shaped hollow, out of which stretched the
long necks and the gaping orange mouths. Andrews ran into him at
the door.

"Hello, Dad," he said. "What the hell?"

"I just picked these up."

"So they couldn't let the poor little devils stay there? God! it
looks to me as if they went out of their way to give pain to
everything, bird, beast or man."

"War ain't no picnic," said Judkins.

"Well, God damn it, isn't that a reason for not going out of your
way to raise more hell with people's feelings than you have to?"

A face with peaked chin and nose on which was stretched a
parchment-colored skin appeared in the door.

"Hello, boys," said the "Y" man. "I just thought I'd tell you I'm
going to open the canteen tomorrow, in the last shack on the
Beaucourt road. There'll be chocolate, ciggies, soap, and
everything."

Everybody cheered. The "Y" man beamed.

His eye lit on the little birds in Dad's hands.

"How could you?" he said. "An American soldier being deliberately
cruel. I would never have believed it."

"Ye've got somethin' to learn," muttered Dad, waddling out into
the twilight on his bandy legs.

Chrisfield had been watching the scene at the door with unseeing
eyes. A terrified nervousness that he tried to beat off had come
over him. It was useless to repeat to himself again and again that
he didn't give a damn; the prospect of being brought up alone
before all those officers, of being cross-questioned by those curt
voices, frightened him. He would rather have been lashed. Whatever
was he to say, he kept asking himself; he would get mixed up or
say things he didn't mean to, or else he wouldn't be able to get
a word out at all. If only Andy could go up with him, Andy was
educated, like the officers were; he had more learning than the
whole shooting-match put together. He'd be able to defend himself,
and defend his friends, too, if only they'd let him.

"I felt just like those little birds that time they got the bead
on our trench at Boticourt," said Jenkins, laughing.

Chrisfield listened to the talk about him as if from another
world. Already he was cut off from his outfit. He'd disappear and
they'd never know or care what became of him.

The mess-call blew and the men filed out. He could hear their talk
outside, and the sound of their mess-kits as they opened them. He
lay on his bunk staring up into the dark. A faint blue light still
came from outside, giving a curious purple color to Small's red
face and long drooping nose at the end of which hung a glistening
drop of moisture.



Chrisfield found Andrews washing a shirt in the brook that flowed
through the ruins of the village the other side of the road from
the buildings where the division was quartered. The blue sky
flicked with pinkish-white clouds gave a shimmer of blue and
lavender and white to the bright water. At the bottom could be
seen battered helmets and bits of equipment and tin cans that had
once held meat. Andrews turned his head; he had a smudge of mud
down his nose and soapsuds on his chin.

"Hello, Chris," he said, looking him in the eyes with his
sparkling blue eyes, "how's things?" There was a faint anxious
frown on his forehead.

"Two-thirds of one month's pay an' confined to quarters," said
Chrisfield cheerfully.

"Gee, they were easy."

"Um-hum, said Ah was a good shot an' all that, so they'd let me
off this time."

Andrews started scrubbing at his shirt again.

"I've got this shirt so full of mud I don't think I ever will get
it clean," he said.

"Move ye ole hide away, Andy. Ah'll wash it. You ain't no good for
nothin'."

"Hell no, I'll do it."

"Move ye hide out of there."

"Thanks awfully."

Andrews got to his feet and wiped the mud off his nose with his
bare forearm.

"Ah'm goin' to shoot that bastard," said Chrisfield, scrubbing at
the shirt.

"Don't be an ass, Chris."

"Ah swear to God Ah am."

"What's the use of getting all wrought up. The thing's over.
You'll probably never see him again."

"Ah ain't all het up.... Ah'm goin' to do it though." He wrung the
shirt out carefully and flipped Andrews in the face with it.
"There ye are," he said.

"You're a good fellow, Chris, even if you are an ass."

"Tell me we're going into the line in a day or two."

"There's been a devil of a lot of artillery going up the road;
French, British, every old kind."

"Tell me they's raisin' hell in the Oregon forest."

They walked slowly across the road. A motorcycle despatch-rider
whizzed past them.

"It's them guys has the fun," said Chrisfield.

"I don't believe anybody has much."

"What about the officers?"

"They're too busy feeling important to have a real hell of a
time."



The hard cold rain beat like a lash in his; face. There was no
light anywhere and no sound but the hiss of the rain in the grass.
His eyes strained to see through the dark until red and yellow
blotches danced before them. He walked very slowly and carefully,
holding something very gently in his hand under his raincoat. He
felt himself full of a strange subdued fury; he seemed to be walk-
ing behind himself spying on his own actions, and what he saw made
him feel joyously happy, made him want to sing.

He turned so that the rain beat against his cheek. Under his
helmet he felt his hair full of sweat that ran with the rain down
his glowing face. His fingers clutched very carefully the smooth
stick he had in his hand.

He stopped and shut his eyes for a moment; through the hiss of the
rain he had heard a sound of men talking in one of the shanties.
When he shut his eyes he saw the white face of Anderson before
him, with its unshaven chin and the eyebrows that met across the
nose.

Suddenly he felt the wall of a house in front of him. He put out
his hand. His hand jerked back from the rough wet feel of the tar
paper, as if it had touched something dead. He groped along the
wall, stepping very cautiously. He felt as he had felt
reconnoitering in the Bringy Wood. Phrases came to his mind as
they had then. Without thinking what they meant, the words Make
the world safe for Democracy formed themselves in his head. They
were very comforting. They occupied his thoughts. He said them to
himself again and again. Meanwhile his free hand was fumbling very
carefully with the fastening that held the wooden shutter over a
window. The shutter opened a very little, creaking loudly, louder
than the patter of rain on the roof of the shack. A stream of
water from the roof was pouring into his face.

Suddenly a beam of light transformed everything, cutting the
darkness in two. The rain glittered like a bead curtain.
Chrisfield was looking into a little room where a lamp was
burning. At a table covered with printed blanks of different size
sat a corporal; behind him was a bunk and a pile of equipment. The
corporal was reading a magazine. Chrisfield looked at him a long
time; his fingers were tight about the smooth stick. There was no
one else in the room.

A sort of panic seized Chrisfield; he strode away noisily from the
window and pushed open the door of the shack.

"Where's Sergeant Anderson?" he asked in a breathless voice of the
first man he saw.

"Corp's there if it's anything important," said the man.
"Anderson's gone to an O. T. C. Left day before yesterday."

Chrisfield was out in the rain again. It was beating straight in
his face, so that his eyes were full of water. He was trembling.
He had suddenly become terrified. The smooth stick he held seemed
to burn him. He was straining his ears for an explosion. Walking
straight before him down the road, he went faster and faster as if
trying to escape from it. He stumbled on a pile of stones.
Automatically he pulled the string out of the grenade and threw
it far from him.

There was a minute's pause.

Red flame spurted in the middle of the wheatfield. He felt the
sharp crash in his eardrums.

He walked fast through the rain. Behind him, at the door of the
shack, he could hear excited voices. He walked recklessly on, the
rain blinding him. When he finally stepped into the light he was
so dazzled he could not see who was in the wine shop.

"Well, I'll be damned, Chris," said Andrews's voice. Chrisfield
blinked the rain out of his lashes. Andrews sat writing with a
pile of papers before him and a bottle of champagne. It seemed to
Chrisfield to soothe his nerves to hear Andy's voice. He wished he
would go on talking a long time without a pause.

"If you aren't the crowning idiot of the ages," Andrews went on in
a low voice. He took Chrisfield by the arm and led him into the
little back room, where was a high bed with a brown coverlet and a
big kitchen table on which were the remnants of a meal.

"What's the matter? Your arm's trembling like the devil. But
why.... O pardon, Crimpette. C'est un ami.... You know Crimpette,
don't you?" He pointed to a youngish woman who had just appeared
from behind the bed. She had a flabby rosy face and violet circles
under her eyes, dark as if they'd been made by blows, and untidy
hair. A dirty grey muslin dress with half the hooks off held in
badly her large breasts and flabby figure. Chrisfield looked at
her greedily, feeling his furious irritation flame into one
desire.

"What's the matter with you, Chris? You're crazy to break out of
quarters this way?"

"Say, Andy, git out o' here. Ah ain't your sort anyway.... Git out
o' here."

"You're a wild man. I'll grant you that.... But I'd just as soon
be your sort as anyone else's.... Have a drink."

"Not now."

Andrews sat down with his bottle and his papers, pushing away the
broken plates full of stale food to make a place on the greasy
table. He took a gulp out of the bottle, that made him cough, then
put the end of his pencil in his mouth and stared gravely at the
paper.

"No, I'm your sort, Chris," he said over his shoulder, "only
they've tamed me. O God, how tame I am."

Chrisfield did not listen to what he was saying. He stood in front
of the woman, staring in her face. She looked at him in a stupid
frightened way. He felt in his pockets for some money. As he had
just been paid he had a fifty-franc note. He spread it out
carefully before her. Her eyes glistened. The pupils seemed to
grow smaller as they fastened on the bit of daintily colored
paper. He crumpled it up suddenly in his fist and shoved it down
between her breasts.



Some time later Chrisfield sat down in front of Andrews. He still
had his wet slicker on.

"Ah guess you think Ah'm a swine," he said in his normal voice.
"Ah guess you're about right."

"No, I don't," said Andrews. Something made him put his hand on
Chrisfield's hand that lay on the table. It had a feeling of cool
health.

"Say, why were you trembling so when you came in here? You seem
all right now."

"Oh, Ah dunno,'" said Chrisfield in a soft resonant voice.

They were silent for a long while. They could hear the woman's
footsteps going and coming behind them.

"Let's go home," said Chrisfield.

"All right.... Bonsoir, Crimpette."

Outside the rain had stopped. A stormy wind had torn the clouds to
rags. Here and there clusters of stars showed through.
They splashed merrily through the puddles. But here and there
reflected a patch of stars when the wind was not ruffling them.

"Christ, Ah wish Ah was like you, Andy," said Chrisfield.

"You don't want to be like me, Chris. I'm no sort of a person at
all. I'm tame. O you don't know how damn tame I am."

"Learnin' sure do help a feller to git along in the world."

"Yes, but what's the use of getting along if you haven't any world
to get along in? Chris, I belong to a crowd that just fakes
learning. I guess the best thing that can happen to us is to get
killed in this butchery. We're a tame generation.... It's you that
it matters to kill."

"Ah ain't no good for anythin'.... Ah doan give a damn.... Lawsee,
Ah feel sleepy."

As they slipped in the door of their quarters, the sergeant looked
at Chrisfield searchingly. Andrews spoke up at once.

"There's some rumors going on at the latrine, Sarge. The fellows
from the Thirty-second say we're going to march into hell's half-
acre about Thursday."

"A lot they know about it."

"That's the latest edition of the latrine news."

"The hell it is! Well, d'you want to know something, Andrews....
It'll be before Thursday, or I'm a Dutchman."

Sergeant Higgins put on a great air of mystery.

Chrisfield went to his bunk, undressed quietly and climbed into
his blankets. He stretched his arms languidly a couple of times,
and while Andrews was still talking to the sergeant, fell asleep.



                              IV

The moon lay among clouds on the horizon, like a big red pumpkin
among its leaves.

Chrisfield  squinted at it through the boughs of the apple trees
laden with apples that gave a winey fragrance to the crisp air. He
was sitting on the ground, his legs stretched limply before him,
leaning against the rough trunk of an apple tree. Opposite him,
leaning against another tree, was the square form, surmounted by a
large long-jawed face, of Judkins. Between them lay two empty
cognac bottles. All about them was the rustling orchard, with its
crooked twigs that made a crackling sound rubbing together in the
gusts of the autumn wind, that came heavy with a smell of damp
woods and of rotting fruits and of all the ferment of the over-
ripe fields. Chrisfield felt it stirring the moist hair on his
forehead and through the buzzing haze of the cognac heard the
plunk, plunk, plunk of apples dropping that followed each gust,
and the twanging of night insects, and, far in the distance, the
endless rumble of guns, like tomtoms beaten for a dance.

"Ye heard what the Colonel said, didn't ye?" said Judkins in a
voice hoarse from too much drink.

Chrisfield belched and nodded his head vaguely. He remembered
Andrews's white fury after the men had been dismissed, how he had
sat down on the end of a log by the field kitchen, staring at the
patch of earth he beat into mud with the toe of his boot.

"Then," went on Judkins, trying to imitate the Colonel's solemn
efficient voice, "'On the subject of prisoners'"--he hiccoughed
and made a limp gesture with his hand--"'On the subject of
prisoners, well, I'll leave that to you, but juss remember...juss
remember what the Huns did to Belgium, an' I might add that we
have barely enough emergency rations as it is, and the more
prisoners you have the less you fellers'll git to eat.'"

"That's what he said, Judkie; that's what he said."

"'An the more prisoners ye have, the less youse'll git to eat,'"
chanted Judkins, making a triumphal flourish with his hand.

Chrisfield groped for the cognac bottle; it was empty; he waved it
in the air a minute and then threw it into the tree opposite him.
A shower of little apples fell about Judkins's head. He got
unsteadily to his feet.

"I tell you, fellers," he said, "war ain't no picnic."

Chrisfield stood up and grabbed at an apple. His teeth crunched
into it.

"Sweet," he said.

"Sweet, nauthin'," mumbled Judkins, "war ain't no picnic.... I
tell you, buddy, if you take any prisoners"--he hiccoughed--
"after what the Colonel said, I'll lick the spots out of you, by
God I will.... Rip up their guts that's all, like they was
dummies. Rip up their guts." His voice suddenly changed to one of
childish dismay. "Gee, Chris, I'm going to be sick," he whispered.

"Look out," said Chrisfield, pushing him away. Judkins leaned
against a tree and vomited.

The full moon had risen above the clouds and filled the apple
orchard with chilly golden light that cast a fantastic shadow
pattern of interlaced twigs and branches upon the bare ground
littered with apples. The sound of the guns had grown nearer.
There were loud eager rumbles as of bowls being rolled very hard
on a bowling alley, combined with a continuous roar like sheets of
iron being shaken.

"Ah bet it's hell out there," said Chrisfield.

"I feel better," said Judkins. "Let's go get some more cognac."

"Ah'm hungry," said Chrisfield. "Let's go an' get that ole woman
to cook us some aigs."

"Too damn late," growled Judkins.

"How the hell late is it?"

"Dunno, I sold my watch."

They were walking at random through the orchard. They came to a
field full of big pumpkins that gleamed in the moonlight and cast
shadows black as holes. In the distance they could see wooded
hills.

Chrisfield picked up a medium-sized pumpkin and threw it as hard
as he could into the air. It split into three when it landed with
a thud on the ground, and the moist yellow seeds spilled out.

"Some strong man, you are," said Judkins, tossing up a bigger one.

"Say, there's a farmhouse, maybe we could get some aigs from the
hen-roost."

"Hell of a lot of hens...."

At that moment the crowing of a rooster came across the silent
fields. They ran towards the dark farm buildings.

"Look out, there may be officers quartered there."

They walked cautiously round the square, silent group of
buildings. There were no lights. The big wooden door of the court
pushed open easily, without creaking. On the roof of the barn the
pigeon-cot was etched dark against the disc of the moon. A warm
smell of stables blew in their faces as the two men tiptoed into
the manure-littered farmyard. Under one of the sheds they found a
table on which a great many pears were set to ripen. Chrisfield
put his teeth into one. The rich sweet juice ran down his chin. He
ate the pear quickly and greedily, and then bit into another.

"Fill yer pockets with 'em," whispered Judkins.

"They might ketch us."

"Ketch us, hell. We'll be goin' into the offensive in a day or
two."

"Ah sure would like to git some aigs."

Chrisfield pushed open the door of one of the barns. A smell of
creamy milk and cheeses filled his nostrils.

"Come here," he whispered. "Want some cheese?"

A lot of cheeses ranged on a board shone silver in the moonlight
that came in through the open door.

"Hell, no, ain't fit te eat," said Judkins, pushing his heavy fist
into one of the new soft cheeses.

"Doan do that."

"Well, ain't we saved 'em from the Huns?"

"But, hell."

"War ain't no picnic, that's all," said Judkins.

In the next door they found chickens roosting in a small room with
straw on the floor. The chickens ruffled their feathers and made a
muffled squeaking as they slept.

Suddenly there was a loud squawking and all the chickens were
cackling with terror.

"Beat it," muttered Judkins, running for the gate of the farmyard.

There were shrill cries of women in the house. A voice shrieking,
"C'est les Boches, C'est les Boches," rose above the cackling of
chickens and the clamor of guinea-hens. As they ran, they heard
the rasping cries of a woman in hysterics, rending the rustling
autumn night.

"God damn," said Judkins breathless, "they ain't got no right,
those frogs ain't, to carry on like that."

They ducked into the orchard again. Above the squawking of the
chicken Judkins still held, swinging it by its legs, Chrisfield
could hear the woman's voice shrieking. Judkins dexterously wrung
the chicken's neck. Crushing the apples underfoot they strode fast
through the orchard. The voice faded into the distance until it
could not be heard above the sound of the guns.

"Gee, Ah'm kind o' cut up 'bout that lady," said Chrisfield.

"Well, ain't we saved her from the Huns?"

"Andy don't think so."

"Well, if you want to know what I think about that guy Andy I
don't think much of him. I think he's yaller, that's all," said
Judkins.

"No, he ain't."

"I heard the lootenant say so. He's a goddam yeller dawg."

Chrisfield swore sullenly.

"Well, you juss wait 'n see. I tell you, buddy, war ain't no
picnic."

"What the hell are we goin' to do with that chicken?" said
Judkins.

"You remember what happened to Eddie White?"

"Hell, we'd better leave it here."

Judkins swung the chicken by its neck round his head and threw it
as hard as he could into the bushes.

They were walking along the road between chestnut trees that led
to their village. It was dark except for irregular patches of
bright moonlight in the centre that lay white as milk among the
indentated shadows of the leaves. All about them rose a cool scent
of woods, of ripe fruits and of decaying leaves, of the ferment of
the autumn countryside.



The lieutenant sat at a table in the sun, in the village street
outside the company office. In front of him sparkled piles of
money and daintily tinted banknotes. Beside him stood Sergeant
Higgins with an air of solemnity and the second sergeant and the
corporal. The men stood in line and as each came before the table
he saluted with deference, received his money and walked away with
a self-conscious air. A few villagers looked on from the small
windows with grey frames of their rambling whitewashed houses. In
the ruddy sunshine the line of men cast an irregular blue-violet
shadow, like a gigantic centipede, on the yellow gravel road.

From the table by the window of the cafe of "Nos Braves Poilus"
where Small and Judkins and Chrisfield had established themselves
with their pay crisp in their pockets, they could see the little
front garden of the house across the road, where, behind a hedge
of orange marigolds, Andrews sat on the doorstep talking to an old
woman hunched on a low chair in the sun just inside the door, who
leant her small white head over towards his yellow one.

"There ye are," said Judkins in a solemn tone. "He don't even go
after his pay. That guy thinks he's the whole show, he does."

Chrisfield flushed, but said nothing. "He don't do nothing all day
long but talk to that ole lady," said Small with a grin. "Guess
she reminds him of his mother, or somethin'."

"He always does go round with the frogs all he can. Looks to me
like he'd rather have a drink with a frog than with an American."

"Reckon he wants to learn their language," said Small. "He won't
never come to much in this army, that's what I'm telling yer,"
said Judkins.

The little houses across the way had flushed red with the sunset.
Andrews got to his feet slowly and languidly and held out his hand
to the old woman. She stood up, a small tottering figure in a
black silk shawl. He leaned over towards her and she kissed both
his cheeks vigorously several times. He walked down the road
towards the billets, with his fatigue cap in his hand, looking at
the ground.

"He's got a flower behind his ear, like a cigarette," said
Judkins, with a disgusted snort.

"Well, I guess we'd better go," said Small. "We got to be in
quarters at six."

They were silent a moment. In the distance the guns kept up a
continual tomtom sound.

"Guess we'll be in that soon," said Small.

Chrisfield felt a chill go down his spine. He moistened his lips
with his tongue.

"Guess it's hell out there," said Judkins. "War ain't no picnic."

"Ah doan give a hoot in hell," said Chrisfield.



The men were lined up in the village street with their packs on,
waiting for the order to move. Thin wreaths of white mist still
lingered in the trees and over the little garden plots. The sun
had not yet risen, but ranks of clouds in the pale blue sky
overhead were brilliant with crimson and gold. The men stood in an
irregular line, bent over a little by the weight of their
equipment, moving back and forth, stamping their feet and beating
their arms together, their noses and ears red from the chill of
the morning. The haze of their breath rose above their heads.

Down the misty road a drab-colored limousine appeared, running
slowly. It stopped in front of the line of men. The lieutenant
came hurriedly out of the house opposite, drawing on a pair of
gloves. The men standing in line looked curiously at the
limousine. They could see that two of the tires were flat and that
the glass was broken. There were scratches on the drab paint and
in the door three long jagged holes that obliterated the number. A
little murmur went down the line of men. The door opened with
difficulty, and a major in a light buff-colored coat stumbled out.
One arm, wrapped in bloody bandages, was held in a sling made of a
handkerchief. His face was white and drawn into a stiff mask with
pain. The lieutenant saluted.

"For God's sake where's a repair station?" he asked in a loud
shaky voice.

"There's none in this village, Major."

"Where the hell is there one?"

"I don't know," said the lieutenant in a humble tone.

"Why the hell don't you know? This organization's rotten, no
good.... Major Stanley's just been killed. What the hell's the
name of this village?"

"Thiocourt."

"Where the hell's that?"

The chauffeur had leaned out. He had no cap and his hair was full
of dust.

"You see, Lootenant, we wants to get to Chalons--"

"Yes, that's it. Chalons sur...Chalons-sur-Marne," said the Major.

"The billeting officer has a map," said the lieutenant, "last
house to the left."

"O let's go there quick," said the major. He fumbled with the
fastening of the door.

The lieutenant opened it for him.

As he opened the door, the men nearest had a glimpse of the
interior of the car. On the far side was a long object huddled in
blankets, propped up on the seat.

Before he got in the major leaned over and pulled a woollen rug
out, holding it away from him with his one good arm. The car moved
off slowly, and all down the village street the men, lined up
waiting for orders, stared curiously at the three jagged holes in
the door.

The lieutenant looked at the rug that lay in the middle of the
road. He touched it with his foot. It was soaked with blood that
in places had dried into clots.

The lieutenant and the men of his company looked at it in silence.
The sun had risen and shone on the roofs of the little whitewashed
houses behind them. Far down the road a regiment had begun to
move.



                               V

At the brow of the hill they rested. Chrisfield sat on the red
clay bank and looked about him, his rifle between his knees. In
front of him on the side of the road was a French burying ground,
where the little wooden crosses, tilting in every direction, stood
up against the sky, and the bead wreaths glistened in the warm
sunlight. All down the road as far as he could see was a long drab
worm, broken in places by strings of motor trucks, a drab worm
that wriggled down the slope, through the roofless shell of the
village and up into the shattered woods on the crest of the next
hills. Chrisfield strained his eyes to see the hills beyond. They
lay blue and very peaceful in the moon mist. The river glittered
about the piers of the wrecked stone bridge, and disappeared
between rows of yellow poplars. Somewhere in the valley a big gun
fired. The shell shrieked into the distance, towards the blue,
peaceful hills.

Chrisfield's regiment was moving again. The men, their feet
slipping in the clayey mud, went downhill with long strides, the
straps of their packs tugging at their shoulders.

"Isn't this great country?" said Andrews, who marched beside him.

"Ah'd liever be at an O. T. C. like that bastard Anderson."

"Oh, to hell with that," said Andrews. He still had a big faded
orange marigold in one of the buttonholes of his soiled tunic. He
walked with his nose in the air and his nostrils dilated, enjoying
the tang of the autumnal sunlight.

Chrisfield took the cigarette, that had gone out half-smoked, from
his mouth and spat savagely at the heels of the man in front of
him.

"This ain't no life for a white man," he said.

"I'd rather be this than...than that," said Andrews bitterly. He
tossed his head in the direction of a staff car full of officers
that was stalled at the side of the road. They were drinking
something out of a thermos bottle that they passed round with the
air of Sunday excursionists. They waved, with a conscious
relaxation of discipline, at the men as they passed. One, a little
lieutenant with a black mustache with pointed ends, kept crying:
"They're running like rabbits, fellers; they're running like
rabbits." A wavering half-cheer would come  from the column now
and then where it was passing the staff car.

The big gun fired again. Chrisfield was near it this time and felt
the concussion like a blow in the head.

"Some baby," said the man behind him.

Someone was singing:

"Good morning, mister Zip Zip Zip,
 With your hair cut just as short as,
 With your hair cut just as short as,
 With your hair cut just as short as mi-ine."

Everybody took it up. Their steps rang in rhythm in the paved
street that zigzagged among the smashed houses of the village.
Ambulances passed them, big trucks full of huddled men with grey
faces, from which came a smell of sweat and blood and carbolic.
Somebody went on:

"O ashes to ashes
 An' dust to dust..."

"Can that," cried Judkins, "it ain't lucky."

But everybody had taken up the song. Chrisfield noticed that
Andrews's eyes were sparkling. "If he ain't the damnedest," he
thought to himself. But he shouted at the top of his lungs with
the rest:

"O ashes to ashes
 An' dust to dust;
 If the gasbombs don't get yer
             The eighty-eights must."

They were climbing the hill again. The road was worn into deep
ruts and there were many shell holes, full of muddy water, into
which their feet slipped. The woods began, a shattered skeleton of
woods, full of old artillery emplacements and dugouts, where torn
camouflage fluttered from splintered trees. The ground and the
road were littered with tin cans and brass shell-cases. Along both
sides of the road the trees were festooned, as with creepers, with
strand upon strand of telephone wire.

When next they stopped Chrisfield was on the crest of the hill
beside a battery of French seventy-fives. He looked curiously at
the Frenchmen, who sat about on logs in their pink and blue shirt-
sleeves playing cards and smoking. Their gestures irritated him.

"Say, tell 'em we're advancin'," he said to Andrews.

"Are we?" said Andrews. "All right.... Dites-donc, les Boches
courent-ils comme des lapins?" he shouted.

One of the men turned his head and laughed.

"He says they've been running that way for four years," said
Andrews. He slipped his pack off, sat down on it, and fished for a
cigarette. Chrisfield took off his helmet and rubbed a muddy hand
through his hair. He took a bite of chewing tobacco and sat with
his hands clasped over his knees.

"How the hell long are we going to wait this time?" he muttered.
The shadows of the tangled and splintered trees crept slowly
across the road. The French artillerymen were eating their supper.
A long train of motor trucks growled past, splashing mud over the
men crowded along the sides of the road. The sun set, and a lot of
batteries down in the valley began firing, making it impossible to
talk. The air was full of a shrieking and droning of shells
overhead. The Frenchmen stretched and yawned and went down into
their dugout. Chrisfield watched them enviously. The stars were
beginning to come out in the green sky behind the tall lacerated
trees. Chrisfield's legs ached with cold. He began to get crazily
anxious  for something to happen, for something to happen, but the
column waited, without moving, through the gathering darkness.
Chrisfield chewed steadily, trying to think of nothing but the
taste of the tobacco in his mouth.

The column was moving again; as they reached the brow of another
hill Chrisfield felt a curious sweetish smell that made his
nostrils smart. "Gas," he thought, full of panic, and put his hand
to the mask that hung round his neck. But he did not want to be
the first to put it on. No order came. He marched on, cursing the
sergeant and the lieutenant. But maybe they'd been killed by it.
He had a vision of the whole regiment sinking down in the road
suddenly, overcome by the gas.

"Smell anythin', Andy?" he whispered cautiously.

"I can smell a combination of dead horses and tube roses and
banana oil and the ice cream we used to have at college and dead
rats in the garret, but what the hell do we care now?" said
Andrews, giggling. "This is the damnedest fool business ever...."

"He's crazy," muttered Chrisfield to himself. He looked at the
stars in the black sky that seemed to be going along with the
column on its march. Or was it that they and the stars were
standing still while the trees moved away from them, waving their
skinny shattered arms? He could hardly hear the tramp of feet on
the road, so loud was the pandemonium of the guns ahead and
behind. Every now and then a rocket would burst in front of
them and its red and green lights would mingle for a moment with
the stars. But it was only overhead he could see the stars.
Everywhere else white and red glows rose and fell as if the
horizon were on fire.

As they started down the slope, the trees suddenly broke away and
they saw the valley between them full of the glare of guns and the
white light of star shells. It was like looking into a stove full
of glowing embers. The hillside that sloped away from them was
full of crashing detonations and yellow tongues of flame. In a
battery near the road, that seemed to crush their skulls each time
a gun fired, they could see the dark forms of the artillerymen
silhouetted in fantastic attitudes against the intermittent red
glare. Stunned and blinded, they kept on marching down the road.
It seemed to Chrisfield that they were going to step any minute
into the flaring muzzle of a gun.

At the foot of the hill, beside a little grove of uninjured trees,
they stopped again. A new train of trucks was crawling past them,
huge blots in the darkness. There were no batteries near, so they
could hear the grinding roar of the gears as the trucks went along
the uneven road, plunging in and out of shellholes.

Chrisfield lay down in the dry ditch, full of bracken, and dozed
with his head on his pack. All about him were stretched other men.
Someone was resting his head on Chrisfield's thigh. The noise had
subsided a little. Through his doze he could hear men's voices
talking in low crushed tones, as if they were afraid of speaking
aloud. On the road the truck-drivers kept calling out to each
other shrilly, raspingly. The motors stopped running one after
another, making almost a silence, during which Chrisfield fell
asleep.

Something woke him. He was stiff with cold and terrified. For a
moment he thought he had been left alone, that the company had
gone on, for there was no one touching him.

Overhead was a droning as of gigantic mosquitoes, growing fast to
a loud throbbing. He heard the lieutenant's voice calling shrilly:

"Sergeant Higgins, Sergeant Higgins!"

The lieutenant stood out suddenly black against a sheet of flame.
Chrisfield could see his fatigue cap a little on one side and his
trench coat, drawn in tight at the waist and sticking out stiffly
at the knees. He was shaken by the explosion. Everything was black
again. Chrisfield got to his feet, his ears ringing. The column
was moving on. He heard moaning near him in the darkness. The
tramp of feet and jingle of equipment drowned all other sound. He
could feel his shoulders becoming raw under the tugging of the
pack. Now and then the flare from aeroplane bombs behind him
showed up wrecked trucks on the side of the road. Somewhere a
machine gun spluttered. But the column tramped on, weighed down by
the packs, by the deadening exhaustion.

The turbulent flaring darkness was calming to the grey of dawn
when Chrisfield stopped marching. His eyelids stung as if his
eyeballs were flaming hot. He could not feel his feet and legs.
The guns continued incessantly like a hammer beating on his head.
He was walking very slowly in a single file, now and then
stumbling against the man ahead of him. There was earth on both
sides of him, clay walls that dripped moisture. All at once he
stumbled down some steps into a dugout, where it was pitch-black.
An unfamiliar smell struck him, made him uneasy; but his thoughts
seemed to reach him from out of a great distance. He groped to the
wall. His knees struck against a bunk with blankets in it. In
another second he was sunk fathoms deep in sleep.

When he woke up his mind was very clear. The roof of the dugout
was of logs. A bright spot far away was the door. He hoped
desperately that he wasn't on duty. He wondered where Andy was;
then he remembered that Andy was crazy,--"a yeller dawg," Judkins
had called him. Sitting up with difficulty he undid his shoes and
puttees, wrapped himself in his blanket. All round him were snores
and the deep breathing of exhausted sleep. He closed his eyes.

He was being court-martialled. He stood with his hands at his
sides before three officers at a table. All three had the same
white faces with heavy blue jaws and eyebrows that met above the
nose. They were reading things out of papers aloud, but, although
he strained his ears, he couldn't make out what they were saying.
All he could hear was a faint moaning. Something had a curious un-
familiar smell that troubled him. He could not stand still at
attention, although the angry eyes of officers stared at him from
all round. "Anderson, Sergeant Anderson, what's that smell?" he
kept asking in a small whining voice. "Please tell a feller what
that smell is." But the three officers at the table kept reading
from their papers, and the moaning grew louder and louder in his
ears until he shrieked aloud. There was a grenade in his hand. He
pulled the string out and threw it, and he saw the lieutenant's
trench coat stand out against a sheet of flame. Someone sprang at
him. He was wrestling for his life with Anderson, who turned into
a woman with huge flabby breasts. He crushed her to him and turned
to defend himself against three officers who came at him, their
trench coats drawn in tightly at the waist until they looked like
wasps. Everything faded, he woke up.

His nostrils were still full of the strange troubling smell. He
sat on the edge of the bunk, wriggling in his clothes, for his
body crawled with lice.

"Gee, it's funny to be in where the Fritzies were not long ago,"
he heard a voice say.

"Kiddo! we're advancin'," came another voice.

"But, hell, this ain't no kind of an advance. I ain't seen a
German yet."

"Ah kin smell 'em though," said Chrisfield, getting suddenly to
his feet.

Sergeant Higgins' head appeared in the door. "Fall in," he
shouted. Then he added in his normal voice, "It's up and at 'em,
fellers."



Chrisfield caught his puttee on a clump of briars at the edge of
the clearing and stood kicking his leg back and forth to get it
free. At last he broke away, the torn puttee dragging behind him.
Out in the sunlight in the middle of the clearing he saw a man in
olive-drab kneeling beside something on the ground. A German lay
face down with a red hole in his back. The man was going through
his pockets. He looked up into Chrisfield's face.

"Souvenirs," he said.

"What outfit are you in, buddy?"

"143rd," said the man, getting to his feet slowly.

"Where the hell are we?"

"Damned if I know."

The clearing was empty, except for the two Americans and the
German with the hole in his back. In the distance they heard a
sound of artillery and nearer the "put, put, put" of isolated
machine guns. The leaves of the trees about them, all shades of
brown and crimson and yellow, danced in the sunlight.

"Say, that damn money ain't no good, is it?" asked Chrisfield.

"German money? Hell, no.... I got a watch that's a peach though."
The man held out a gold watch, looking suspiciously at Chrisfield
all the while through half-closed eyes.

"Ah saw a feller had a gold-handled sword," said Chrisfield.

"Where's that?"

"Back there in the wood"; he waved his hand vaguely.

"Ah've got to find ma outfit; comin' along?" Chrisfield started
towards the other edge of the clearing.

"Looks to me all right here," said the other man, lying down on
the grass in the sun.

The leaves rustled underfoot as Chrisfield strode through the
wood. He was frightened by being alone. He walked ahead as fast as
he could, his puttee still dragging behind him. He came to a
barbed-wire entanglement half embedded in fallen beech leaves. It
had been partly cut in one place, but in crossing he tore his
thigh on a barb. Taking off the torn puttee, he wrapped it round
the outside of his trousers and kept on walking, feeling a little
blood trickle down his leg.

Later he came to a lane that cut straight through the wood where
there were many ruts through the putty-coloured mud puddles; Down
the lane in a patch of sunlight he saw a figure, towards which he
hurried. It was a young man with red hair and a pink-and-white
face. By a gold bar on the collar of his shirt Chrisfield saw that
he was a lieutenant. He had no coat or hat and there was greenish
slime all over the front of his clothes as if he had lain on his
belly in a mud puddle.

"Where you going?"

"Dunno, sir."

"All right, come along." The lieutenant started walking as fast as
he could up the lane, swinging his arms wildly.

"Seen any machine-gun nests?"

"Not a one."

"Hum."

He followed the lieutenant, who walked so fast he had difficulty
keeping up, splashing recklessly through the puddles.

"Where's the artillery? That's what I want to know," cried the
lieutenant, suddenly stopping in his tracks and running a hand
through his red hair. "Where the hell's the artillery?" He looked
at Chrisfield savagely out of green eyes. "No use advancing
without artillery."  He started walking faster than ever.

All at once they saw sunlight ahead of them and olive-drab
uniforms. Machine guns started firing all around them in a sudden
gust. Chrisfield found himself running forward across a field full
of stubble and sprouting clover among a group of men he did not
know. The whip-like sound of rifles had chimed in with the
stuttering of the machine guns. Little white clouds sailed above
him in a blue sky, and in front of him was a group of houses that
had the same color, white with lavender-grey shadows, as the
clouds.

He was in a house, with a grenade like a tin pineapple in each
hand. The sudden loneliness frightened him again. Outside the
house was a sound of machine-gun firing, broken by the occasional
bursting; of a shell. He looked at the red-tiled roof and at a
chromo of a woman nursing a child that hung on the whitewashed
wall opposite him. He was in a small kitchen. There was a fire in
the hearth where something boiled in a black pot. Chrisfield
tiptoed over and looked in. At the bottom of the bubbling water he
saw five potatoes. At the other end of the kitchen, beyond two
broken chairs, was a door. Chrisfield crept over to it, the tiles
seeming to sway under foot. He put his finger to the latch and
took it off again suddenly. Holding in his breath he stood a long
time looking at the door. Then he pulled it open recklessly. A
young man with fair hair was sitting at a table, his head resting
on his hands. Chrisfield felt a spurt of joy when he saw that the
man's uniform was green. Very coolly he pressed the spring, held
the grenade a second and then threw it, throwing himself backwards
into the middle of the kitchen. The light-haired man had not
moved; his blue eyes still stared straight before him.

In the street Chrisfield ran into a tall man who was running. The
man clutched him by the arm and said:

"The barrage is moving up."

"What barrage?"

"Our barrage; we've got to run, we're ahead of it." His voice came
in wheezy pants. There were red splotches on his face. They ran
together down the empty village street. As they ran they passed
the little red-haired lieutenant, who leaned against a whitewashed
wall, his legs a mass of blood and torn cloth. He was shouting in
a shrill delirious voice that followed them out along the open
road.

"Where's the artillery? That's what I want to know; where's the
artillery?"



The woods were grey and dripping with dawn. Chrisfield got stiffly
to his feet from the pile of leaves where he had slept. He felt
numb with cold and hunger, lonely and lost away from his outfit.
All about him were men of another division. A captain with a sandy
mustache was striding up and down with a blanket about him, on the
road just behind a clump of beech trees. Chrisfield had watched
him passing back and forth, back and forth, behind the wet
clustered trunks of the trees, ever since it had been light.
Stamping his feet among the damp leaves, Chrisfield strolled away
from the group of men. No one seemed to notice him. The trees
closed about him. He could see nothing but moist trees, grey-green
and black, and the yellow leaves of saplings that cut off the view
in every direction. He was wondering dully why he was walking off
that way. Somewhere in the back of his mind there was a vague idea
of finding his outfit. Sergeant Higgins and Andy and Judkins and
Small--he wondered what had become of them. He thought of the
company lined up for mess, and the smell of greasy food that came
from the field-kitchen. He was desperately hungry. He stopped and
leaned against the moss-covered trunk of a tree. The deep scratch
in his leg was throbbing as if all the blood in his body beat
through it. Now that his rustling footsteps had ceased, the woods
were absolutely silent, except for the dripping of dew from the
leaves and branches. He strained his ears to hear some other
sound. Then he noticed that he was staring at a tree full of small
red crab apples. He picked a handful greedily, but they were hard
and sour and seemed to make him hungrier. The sour flavour in his
mouth made him furiously angry. He kicked at the thin trunk of the
tree while tears smarted in his eyes. Swearing aloud in a whining
singsong voice, he strode off through the woods with his eyes on
the ground. Twigs snapped viciously in his face, crooked branches
caught at him, but he plunged on. All at once he stumbled against
something hard that bounced among the leaves.

He stopped still, looking about him, terrified. Two grenades lay
just under his foot, a little further on a man was propped against
a tree with his mouth open. Chrisfield thought at first he was
asleep, as his eyes were closed. He looked at the grenades
carefully. The fuses had not been sprung. He put one in each
pocket, gave a glance at the man who seemed to be asleep, and
strode off again, striking another alley in the woods, at the end
of which he could see sunlight. The sky overhead was full of heavy
purple clouds, tinged here and there with yellow. As he walked
towards the patch of sunlight, the thought came to him that he
ought to have looked in the pockets of the man he had just passed
to see if he had any hard bread. He stood still a moment in
hesitation, but started walking again doggedly towards the patch
of sunlight.

Something glittered in the irregular fringe of sun and shadow. A
man was sitting hunched up on the ground with his fatigue cap
pulled over his eyes so that the little gold bar just caught the
horizontal sunlight. Chrisfield's first thought was that he might
have food on him.

"Say, Lootenant," he shouted, "d'you know where a fellow can get
somethin' to eat."

The man lifted his head slowly. Chrisfield turned cold all over
when he saw the white heavy face of Anderson; an unshaven beard
was very black on his square chin; there was a long scratch
clotted with dried blood from the heavy eyebrow across the left
cheek to the corner of the mouth.

"Give me some water, buddy," said Anderson in a weak voice.

Chrisfield handed him his canteen roughly in silence. He noticed
that Anderson's arm was in a sling, and that he drank greedily,
spilling the water over his chin and his wounded arm.

"Where's Colonel Evans?" asked Anderson in a thin petulant voice.

Chrisfield did not reply but stared at him sullenly. The canteen
had dropped from his hand and lay on the ground in front of him.
The water gleamed in the sunlight as it ran out among the russet
leaves. A wind had come up, making the woods resound. A shower of
yellow leaves dropped about them.

"First you was a corporal, then you was a sergeant, and now you're
a lootenant," said Chrisfield slowly.

"You'ld better tell me where Colonel Evans is.... You must
know.... He's up that road somewhere," said Anderson, struggling
to get to his feet.

Chrisfield walked away without answering. A cold hand was round
the grenade in his pocket. He walked away slowly, looking at his
feet.

Suddenly he found he had pressed the spring of the grenade. He
struggled to pull it out of his pocket. It stuck in the narrow
pocket. His arm and his cold fingers that clutched the grenade
seemed paralyzed. Then a warm joy went through him. He had thrown
it.

Anderson was standing up, swaying backwards and forwards. The
explosion made the woods quake. A thick rain of yellow leaves came
down. Anderson was flat on the ground. He was so flat he seemed to
have sunk into the ground.

Chrisfield pressed the spring of the other grenade and threw it
with his eyes closed. It burst among the thick new-fallen leaves.

A few drops of rain were falling. Chrisfield kept on along the
lane, walking fast, feeling full of warmth and strength. The rain
beat hard and cold against his back.

He walked with his eyes to the ground. A voice in a strange
language stopped him. A ragged man in green with a beard that was
clotted with mud stood in front of him with his hands up.
Chrisfield burst out laughing.

"Come along," he said, "quick!"

The man shambled in front of him; he was trembling so hard he
nearly fell with each step.

Chrisfield kicked him.

The man shambled on without turning round. Chrisfield kicked him
again, feeling the point of the man's spine and the soft flesh of
his rump against his toes with each kick, laughing so hard all the
while that he could hardly see where he was going.

"Halt!" came a voice.

"Ah've got a prisoner," shouted Chrisfield still laughing.

"He ain't much of a prisoner," said the man, pointing his bayonet
at the German. "He's gone crazy, I guess. I'll take keer o'
him...ain't no use sendin' him back."

"All right," said Chrisfield still laughing. "Say, buddy, where
can Ah' git something to eat? Ah ain't had nothin' fur a day an a
half."

"There's a reconnoitrin' squad up the line; they'll give
you somethin'.... How's things goin' up that way?" The man pointed
up the road.

"Gawd, Ah doan know. Ah ain't had nothin' to eat fur a day and a
half."



The warm smell of a stew rose to his nostrils from the mess-kit.
Chrisfield stood, feeling warm and important, filling his mouth
with soft greasy potatoes and gravy, while men about him asked him
questions. Gradually he began to feel full and content, and a
desire to sleep came over him. But he was given a gun, and had to
start advancing again with the reconnoitering squad. The squad
went cautiously up the same lane through the woods.

"Here's an officer done for," said the captain, who walked ahead.
He made a little clucking noise of distress with his tongue. "Two
of you fellows go back and git a blanket and take him back to the
cross-roads. Poor fellow." The captain walked on again, still
making little clucking noises with his tongue.

Chrisfield looked straight ahead of him. He did not feel lonely
any more now that he was marching in ranks again. His feet beat
the ground in time with the other feet. He would not have to think
whether to go to the right or to the left. He would do as the
others did.



                      PART FOUR: RUST

                             I

There were tiny green frogs in one of the putty-colored puddles by
the roadside. John Andrews fell out of the slowly advancing column
a moment to look at them. The frogs' triangular heads stuck out of
the water in the middle of the puddle. He leaned over, his hands on
his knees, easing the weight of the equipment on his back. That way
he could see their tiny jewelled eyes, topaz-colored. His eyes felt
as if tears were coming to them with tenderness towards the minute
lithe bodies of the frogs. Something was telling him that he must
run forward and fall into line again, that he must shamble on
through the mud, but he remained staring at the puddle, watching
the frogs. Then he noticed his reflection in the puddle. He looked
at it curiously. He could barely see the outlines of a stained
grimacing mask, and the silhouette of the gun barrel slanting
behind it. So this was what they had made of him. He fixed his eyes
again on the frogs that swam with elastic, leisurely leg strokes in
the putty-colored water.

Absently, as if he had no connection with all that went on about
him, he heard the twang of bursting shrapnel down the road. He had
straightened himself wearily and taken a step forward, when he
found himself sinking into the puddle. A feeling of relief came
over him. His legs sunk in the puddle; he lay without moving
against the muddy bank. The frogs had gone, but from somewhere a
little stream of red was creeping out slowly into the putty-colored
water. He watched the irregular files of men in olive-drab
shambling by. Their footsteps drummed in his ears. He felt
triumphantly separated from them, as if he were in a window
somewhere watching soldiers pass, or in a box of a theater watching
some dreary monotonous play. He drew farther and farther away from
them until they had become very small, like toy soldiers forgotten
among the dust in a garret. The light was so dim he couldn't see,
he could only hear their feet tramping interminably through the
mud.



John Andrews was on a ladder that shook horribly. A gritty sponge
in his hand, he was washing the windows of a barracks. He began in
the left hand corner and soaped the small oblong panes one after
the other. His arms were like lead and he felt that he would fall
from the shaking ladder, but each time he turned to look towards
the ground before climbing down he saw the top of the general's cap
and the general's chin protruding from under the visor, and a voice
snarled: "Attention," terrifying him so that the ladder shook more
than ever; and he went on smearing soap over the oblong panes with
the gritty sponge through interminable hours, though every joint in
his body was racked by the shaking of the ladder. Bright light
flared from inside the windows which he soaped, pane after pane,
methodically. The windows were mirrors. In each pane he saw his
thin face, in shadow, with the shadow of a gun barrel slanting
beside it. The jolting stopped suddenly. He sank into a deep pit of
blackness.

A shrill broken voice was singing in his ear:

"There's a girl in the heart of Maryland
 With a heart that belongs to me-e."

John Andrews opened his eyes. It was pitch black, except for a
series of bright yellow oblongs that seemed to go up into the sky,
where he could see the stars. His mind became suddenly acutely
conscious. He began taking account of himself in a hurried
frightened way. He craned his neck a little. In the darkness he
could make out the form of a man stretched out flat beside him who
kept moving his head strangely from side to side, singing at the
top of his lungs in a shrill broken voice. At that moment Andrews
noticed that the smell of carbolic was overpoweringly strong, that
it dominated all the familiar smells of blood and sweaty clothes.
He wriggled his shoulders so that he could feel the two poles of
the stretcher. Then he fixed his eyes again in the three bright
yellow oblongs, one above the other, that rose into the darkness.
Of course, they were windows; he was near a house.

He moved his arms a little. They felt like lead, but unhurt. Then
he realized that his legs were on fire. He tried to move them;
everything went black again in a sudden agony of pain. The voice
was still shrieking in his ears:

"There's a girl in the heart of Maryland
 With a heart that belongs to me-e."

But another voice could be heard, softer, talking endlessly in
tender clear tones:

"An' he said they were goin' to take me way down south where there
was a little house on the beach, all so warm an' quiet..."

The song of the man beside him rose to a tuneless shriek, like a
phonograph running down:

"An' Mary-land was fairy-land
 When she said that mine she'd be..."

Another voice broke in suddenly in short spurts of whining groans
that formed themselves into fragments of drawn-out intricate
swearing. And all the while the soft voice went on. Andrews
strained his ears to hear it.

It soothed his pain as if some cool fragrant oil were being poured
over his body.

"An' there'll be a garden full of flowers, roses an' hollyhocks,
way down there in the south, an' it'll be so warm an' quiet, an'
the sun'll shine all day, and the sky'll be so blue..."

Andrews felt his lips repeating the words like lips following a
prayer.

"--An' it'll be so warm an' quiet, without any noise at all. An'
the garden'll be full of roses an'..."

But the other voices kept breaking in, drowning out the soft voice
with groans, and strings of whining oaths.

"An' he said I could sit on the porch, an' the sun'll be so warm
an' quiet, an' the garden'll smell so good, an' the beach'll be all
white, an' the sea..."

Andrews felt his head suddenly rise in the air and then his feet.
He swung out of the darkness into a brilliant white corridor. His
legs throbbed with flaming agony. The face of a man with a
cigarette in his mouth peered close to his. A hand fumbled at his
throat, where the tag was, and someone read:

"Andrews, 1.432.286."

But he was listening to the voice out in the dark, behind him, that
shrieked in rasping tones of delirium:

"There's a girl in the heart of Mary-land
 With a heart that belongs to me-e."

Then he discovered that he was groaning. His mind became entirely
taken up in the curious rhythm of his groans. The only parts of his
body that existed were his legs and something in his throat that
groaned and groaned. It was absorbing. White figures hovered about
him, he saw the hairy forearms of a man in shirt sleeves, lights
glared and went out, strange smells entered at his nose and
circulated through his whole body, but nothing could distract his
attention from the singsong of his groans.

Rain fell in his face. He moved his head from side to side,
suddenly feeling conscious of himself. His mouth was dry, like
leather; he put out his tongue to try to catch raindrops in it. He
was swung roughly about in the stretcher. He lifted his head
cautiously, feeling a great throb of delight that he still could
lift his head.

"Keep yer head down, can't yer?" snarled a voice beside him.
He had seen the back of a man in a gleaming wet slicker at the end
of the stretcher.

"Be careful of my leg, can't yer?" he found himself whining over
and over again. Then suddenly there was a lurch that rapped his
head against the crosspiece of the stretcher, and he found himself
looking up at a wooden ceiling from which the white paint had
peeled in places. He smelt gasoline and could hear the throb of an
engine. He began to think back; how long was it since he had looked
at the little frogs in the puddle? A vivid picture came to his mind
of the puddle with its putty-colored water and the little
triangular heads of the frogs. But it seemed as long ago as a
memory of childhood; all of his life before that was not so long as
the time that had gone by since the car had started. And he was
jolting and swinging about in the stretcher, clutching hard with
his hands at the poles of the stretcher. The pain in his legs grew
worse; the rest of his body seemed to shrivel under it. From below
him came a rasping voice that cried out at every lurch of the
ambulance. He fought against the desire to groan, but at last he
gave in and lay lost in the monotonous singsong of his groans.

The rain was in his face again for a moment, then his body was
tilted. A row of houses and russet trees and chimney pots against a
leaden sky swung suddenly up into sight and were instantly replaced
by a ceiling and the coffred vault of a staircase. Andrews was
still groaning softly, but his eyes fastened with sudden interest
on the sculptured rosettes of the coffres and the coats of arms
that made the center of each section of ceiling. Then he found
himself staring in the face of the man who was carrying the lower
end of the stretcher. It was a white face with pimples round the
mouth and good-natured, watery blue eyes. Andrews looked at the
eyes and tried to smile, but the man carrying the stretcher was not
looking at him.

Then after more endless hours of tossing about on the stretcher,
lost in a groaning agony of pain, hands laid hold of him roughly
and pulled his clothes off and lifted him on a cot where he lay
gasping, breathing in the cool smell of disinfectant that hung
about the bedclothes. He heard voices over his head.

"Isn't bad at all...this leg wound.... I thought you said we'd have
to amputate?"

"Well, what's the matter with him, then?"

"Maybe shell-shock...."

A cold sweat of terror took hold of Andrews. He lay perfectly still
with his eyes closed. Spasm after spasm of revolt went through him.
No, they hadn't broken him yet; he still had hold of his nerves, he
kept saying to himself. Still, he felt that his hands, clasped
across his belly, were trembling. The pain in his legs disappeared
in the fright in which he lay, trying desperately to concentrate
his mind on something outside himself. He tried to think of a tune
to hum to himself, but he only heard again shrieking in his ears
the voice which, it seemed to him months and years ago, had sung:

"There's a girl in the heart of Maryland
 With a heart that belo-ongs to me-e."

The voice shrieking the blurred tune and the pain in his legs
mingled themselves strangely, until they seemed one and the pain
seemed merely a throbbing of the maddening tune.

He opened his eyes. Darkness fading into a faint yellow glow.
Hastily he took stock of himself, moved his head and his arms. He
felt cool and very weak and quiet; he must have slept a long time.
He passed his rough dirty, hand over his face. The skin felt soft
and cool. He pressed his cheek on the pillow and felt himself
smiling contentedly, he did not know why.

The Queen of Sheba carried a parasol with little vermilion bells
all round it that gave out a cool tinkle as she walked towards him.
She wore her hair in a high headdress thickly powdered with blue
iris powder, and on her long train, that a monkey held up at the
end, were embroidered in gaudy colors the signs of the zodiac. She
was not the Queen of Sheba, she was a nurse whose face he could not
see in the obscurity, and, sticking an arm behind his head in a
deft professional manner, she gave him something to drink from a
glass without looking at him. He said "Thank you," in his natural
voice, which surprised him in the silence; but she went off without
replying and he saw that it was a trayful of glasses that had
tinkled as she had come towards him.

Dark as it was he noticed the self-conscious tilt of the nurse's
body as she walked silently to the next cot, holding the tray of
glasses in front of her. He twisted his head round on the pillow to
watch how gingerly she put her arm under the next man's head to
give him a drink.

"A virgin," he said to himself, "very much a virgin," and he found
himself giggling softly, notwithstanding the twinges of pain from
his legs. He felt suddenly as if his spirit had awakened from a
long torpor. The spell of dejection that had deadened him for
months had slipped off. He was free. The thought came to him
gleefully, that as long as he stayed in that cot in the hospital no
one would shout orders at him. No one would tell him to clean his
rifle. There would be no one to salute. He would not have
to worry about making himself pleasant to the sergeant. He would
lie there all day long, thinking his own thoughts.

Perhaps he was badly enough wounded to be discharged from the army.
The thought set his heart beating like mad. That meant that he, who
had given himself up for lost, who had let himself be trampled down
unresistingly into the mud of slavery, who had looked for no escape
from the treadmill but death, would live. He, John Andrews, would
live.

And it seemed inconceivable that he had ever given himself up, that
he had ever let the grinding discipline have its way with him. He
saw himself vividly once more as he had seen himself before his
life had suddenly blotted itself out, before he had become a slave
among slaves. He renumbered the garden where, in his boyhood, he
had sat dreaming through the droning summer afternoons under the
crepe myrtle bushes, while the cornfields beyond rustled and
shimmered in the heat. He remembered the day he had stood naked in
the middle of a base room while the recruiting sergeant prodded him
and measured him. He wondered suddenly what the date was. Could it
be that it was only a year ago? Yet in that year all the other
years of his life had been blotted out. But now he would begin
living again. He would give up this cowardly cringing before
external things. He would be recklessly himself.

The pain in his legs was gradually localizing itself into the
wounds. For a while he struggled against it to go on thinking, but
its constant throb kept impinging in his mind until, although he
wanted desperately to comb through his pale memories to remember,
if ever so faintly, all that had been vivid and lusty in his life,
to build himself a new foundation of resistance against the world
from which he could start afresh to live, he became again the
querulous piece of hurt flesh, the slave broken on the treadmill;
he began to groan.

Cold steel-gray light filtered into the ward, drowning the yellow
glow which first turned ruddy and then disappeared. Andrews began
to make out the row of cots opposite him, and the dark beams of the
ceiling above his head. "This house must be very old," he said to
himself, and the thought vaguely excited him. Funny that the Queen
of Sheba had come to his head, it was ages since he'd thought of
all that. From the girl at the cross-roads singing under her
street-lamp to the patrician pulling roses to pieces from the
height of her litter, all the aspects' half-guessed, all the
imaginings of your desire... that was the Queen of Sheba. He
whispered the words aloud, "la reine de Saba, la reine de Saba";
and, with a tremor of anticipation of the sort he used to feel when
he was a small boy the night before Christmas, with a sense of new;
things in store for him, he pillowed his head on his arm and went
quietly to sleep.

"Ain't it juss like them frawgs te make a place like this' into a
hauspital?" said the orderly, standing with his feet wide apart and
his hands on his hips, facing a row of cots and talking to anyone
who  felt well  enough to listen. "Honest, I doan see why you
fellers doan all cash in yer! checks in this hole.... There warn't
even electric light till we put it in.... What d'you think o' that?
That shows how much the goddam  frawgs care...." The orderly was a
short man with a sallow, lined face and large yellow teeth. When he
smiled the horizontal lines in his forehead and the lines that ran
from the sides of his nose to the ends of his mouth deepened so
that his face looked as if it were made up to play a comic part in
the movies.

"It's kind of artistic, though, ain't it?" said Applebaum, whose
cot was next Andrews's,--a skinny man with large, frightened eyes
and an inordinately red face that looked as if the skin had been
peeled off. "Look at the work there is on that ceiling. Must have
cost some dough when it was noo."

"Wouldn't be bad as a dance hall with a little fixin' up, but a
hauspital; hell!"

Andrews lay, comfortable in his cot, looking into the ward out of
another world. He felt no connection with the talk about him, with
the men who lay silent or tossed about groaning in the rows of
narrow cots that filled the Renaissance hall. In the yellow glow of
the electric lights, looking beyond the orderly's twisted  face and
narrow head, he could see very faintly, where the beams of the
ceiling sprung from the wall, a row of half-obliterated shields
supported by figures carved out of the grey stone of the wall,
handed satyrs with horns and goats' beards and deep-set eyes,
little squat figures of warriors and townsmen in square hats with
swords between their bent knees, naked limbs twined in scrolls of
spiked acanthus leaves, all seen very faintly, so that when the
electric lights swung back and forth in the wind made by the
orderly's hurried passing, they all seemed to wink and wriggle in
shadowy mockery of the rows of prostrate bodies in the room beneath
them. Yet they were familiar, friendly to Andrews. He kept feeling
a half-formulated desire to be up there too, crowded under a beam,
grimacing through heavy wreaths of pomegranates and acanthus
leaves, the incarnation of old rich lusts, of clear fires that had
sunk to dust ages since. He felt at home in that spacious hall,
built for wide gestures and stately steps, in which all the little
routine of the army seemed unreal, and  the wounded men discarded
automatons, broken toys laid away in rows.

Andrews was snatched out of his thoughts. Applebaum was speaking to
him; he turned his head.

"How d'you loike it bein' wounded, buddy?"

"Fine."

"Foine, I should think it was.... Better than doin' squads right
all day."

"Where did you get yours?"

"Ain't got only one arm now.... I don't give a damn.... I've driven
my last fare, that's all."

"How d'you mean?"

"I used to drive a taxi."

"That's a pretty good job, isn't it?"

"You bet, big money in it, if yer in right."

"So you used to be a taxi-driver, did you?" broke in the orderly.
"That's a fine job.... When I was in the Providence Hospital half
the fractures was caused by taxis. We had a little girl of six in
the children's ward had her feet cut clean off at the ankles by a
taxi. Pretty yellow hair she had, too. Gangrene.... Only lasted a
day.... Well, I'm going off, I guess you guys wish you was going
to be where I'm goin' to be tonight.... That's one thing you guys
are lucky in, don't have to worry about propho." The orderly
wrinkled his face up and winked elaborately.

"Say, will you do something for me?" asked Andrews.

"Sure, if it ain't no trouble."

"Will you buy me a book?"

"Ain't ye got enough with all the books at the 'Y'?"

"No.... This is a special book," said Andrews smiling, "a French
book."

"A French book, is it? Well, I'll see what I can do. What's it
called?"

"By Flaubert.... Look, if you've got a piece of paper and a pencil,
I'll write it down."

Andrews scrawled the title on the back of an order slip.

"There."

"What the hell? Who's Antoine? Gee whiz, I bet that's hot stuff. I
wish I could read French. We'll have you breakin' loose out o' here
an' going down to number four, roo Villiay, if you read that kind
o' book."

"Has it got pictures?" asked Applebaum. "One feller did break out
o' here a month ago,... Couldn't stand it any longer, I guess.
Well, his wound opened an' he had a hemorrhage, an' now he's
planted out in the back lot.... But I'm goin'. Goodnight." The
orderly bustled to the end of the ward and disappeared.

The lights went out, except for the bulb over the nurse's desk at
the end, beside the ornate doorway, with its wreathed pinnacles
carved out of the grey stone, which could be seen above the white
canvas screen that hid the door.

"What's that book about, buddy?" asked Applebaum, twisting his head
at the end of his lean neck so as to look Andrews full in the face.

"Oh, it's about a man who wants everything so badly that he decides
there's nothing worth wanting."

"I guess youse had a college edication," said Applebaum
sarcastically.

 Andrews laughed.

"Well, I was goin' to tell youse about when I used to drive a taxi.
I was makin' big money when I enlisted. Was you drafted?"

"Yes."

"Well, so was I. I doan think nauthin o' them guys that are so
stuck up 'cause they enlisted, d'you?"

"Not a hell of a lot."

"Don't yer?" came a voice from the other side of Andrews, a thin
voice that stuttered. "W-w-well, all I can say is, it'ld have
sss-spoiled my business if I hadn't enlisted. No, sir, nobody
can say I didn't enlist."

"Well, that's your look-out," said Applebaum.

"You're goddam right, it was."

"Well, ain't your business spoiled anyway?"

"No, sir. I can pick it right up where I left off. I've got an
established reputation."

"What at?"

"I'm an undertaker by profession; my dad was before me."

"Gee, you were right at home!" said Andrews.

"You haven't any right to say that, young feller," said the
undertaker angrily. "I'm a humane man. I won't never be at home in
this dirty butchery."

The nurse was walking by their cots.

"How can you say such dreadful things?" she said. "But lights are
out. You boys have got to keep quiet.... And you," she plucked at
the undertaker's bedclothes, "just remember what the Huns did in
Belgium.... Poor Miss Cavell, a nurse just like I am."

Andrews closed his eyes. The ward was quiet except for the rasping
sound of the snores and heavy breathing of the shattered men all
about him. "And I thought she was the Queen of Sheba," he said to
himself, making a grimace in the dark. Then he began to think of
the music he had intended to write about the Queen of Sheba before
he had stripped his life off in the bare room where they had
measured him and made a soldier of him. Standing in the dark in the
desert of his despair, he would hear the sound of a caravan in the
distance, tinkle of bridles, rasping of horns, braying of donkeys,
and the throaty voices of men singing the songs of desolate roads.
He would look up, and before him he would see, astride their
foaming wild asses, the three green horsemen motionless, pointing
at him with their long forefingers. Then the music would burst in a
sudden hot whirlwind about him, full of flutes and kettledrums and
braying horns and whining bagpipes, and torches would flare red and
yellow, making a tent of light about him, on the edges of which
would crowd the sumpter mules and the brown mule drivers, and the
gaudily caparisoned camels, and the elephants glistening with
jewelled harness. Naked slaves would bend their gleaming backs
before him as they laid out a carpet at his feet; and, through
the flare of torchlight, the Queen, of Sheba would advance towards
him, covered with emeralds and dull-gold ornaments, with a monkey
hopping behind holding up the end of her long train. She would put
her hand with its slim fantastic nails on his shoulder; and, looking
into her eyes, he would suddenly feel within reach all the fiery
imaginings of his desire. Oh, if he could only be free to work.
All the months he had wasted in his life seemed to be marching like
a procession of ghosts before his eyes. And he lay in his cot,
staring with wide open eyes at the ceiling, hoping desperately
that his wounds would be long in healing.



Applebaum sat on the edge of his cot, dressed in a clean new
uniform, of which the left sleeve hung empty, still showing the
creases in which it had been folded.

"So you really are going," said Andrews, rolling his head over on
his pillow to look at him.

"You bet your pants I am, Andy.... An' so could you, poifectly
well, if you'ld talk it up to 'em a little."

"Oh, I wish to God I could. Not that I want to go home, now, but
...if I could get out of uniform."

"I don't blame ye a bit, kid; well, next time, we'll know
better.... Local Board Chairman's going to be my job."

Andrews laughed.

"If I wasn't a sucker...."

"You weren't the only wewe-one," came the undertaker's stuttering
voice from behind Andrews.

"Hell, I thought you enlisted, undertaker."

"Well, I did, by God. but I didn't think it was going to be like
this."

"What did ye think it was goin' to be, a picnic?"

"Hell, I doan care about that, or gettin' gassed, and smashed up,
or anythin', but I thought we was goin' to put things to rights by
comin' over here.... Look here, I had a lively business in the
undertaking way, like my father had had before me.... We did all
the swellest work in Tilletsville...."

"Where?" interrupted Applebaum, laughing.

"Tilletsville; don't you know any geography?"

"Go ahead, tell us about Tilletsville," said Andrews soothingly.

"Why, when Senator Wallace d-d-deceased there, who d'you think had
charge of embalming the body and taking it to the station an'
seeing everything was done fitting? We did.... And I was going to
be married to a dandy girl, and I knowed I had enough pull to get
fixed up, somehow, or to get a commission even, but there I went
like a sucker an' enlisted in the infantry, too.... But, hell,
everybody was saying that we was going to fight to make the world
safe for democracy, and that, if a feller didn't go, no one'ld
trade with him any more."

He started coughing suddenly and seemed unable to stop. At last he
said weakly, in a thin little voice between coughs:

"Well, here I am. There ain't nothing to do about it."

"Democracy.... That's democracy, ain't it: we eat stinkin' goolash
an' that there fat 'Y' woman goes out with Colonels eatin'
chawklate soufflay.... Poifect democracy!... But I tell you what:
it don't do to be the goat."

"But there's so damn many more goats than anything else," said
Andrews.

"There's a sucker born every minute, as Barnum said. You learn that
drivin' a taxicab, if ye don't larn nothin' else.... No, sir, I'm
goin' into politics. I've got good connections up Hundred and
Twenty-fif' street way.... You see, I've got an aunt, Mrs. Sallie
Schultz, owns a hotel on a Hundred and Tirty-tird street. Heard of
Jim O'Ryan, ain't yer? Well, he's a good friend o' hers; see? Bein'
as they're both Catholics... But I'm goin' out this afternoon, see
what the town's like... an ole Ford says the skirts are just
peaches an' cream."

"He juss s-s-says that to torment a feller," stuttered the undertaker.

"I wish I were going with you," said Andrews. "You'll get well
plenty soon enough, Andy, and get yourself marked Class A, and get
given a gun, an--'Over the top, boys!'...to see if the Fritzies
won't make a better shot next time.... Talk about suckers! You're
the most poifect sucker I ever met.... What did you want to tell
the loot your legs didn't hurt bad for? They'll have you out o'
here before you know it.... Well, I'm goin' out to see what the
mamzelles look like."

Applebaum, the uniform hanging in folds about his skinny body,
swaggered to the door, followed by the envious glances of the whole
ward.

"Gee, guess he thinks he's goin' to get to be president," said the
undertaker bitterly.

"He probably will," said Andrews.

He settled himself in his bed again, sinking back into the dull
contemplation of the teasing, smarting pain where the torn
ligaments of his thighs were slowly knitting themselves together.
He tried desperately to forget the pain; there was so much he
wanted to think out. If he could only lie perfectly  quiet, and
piece together the frayed ends of thoughts that kept flickering to
the surface of his mind. He counted up the days he had been in the
hospital; fifteen! Could it be that long? And he had not thought of
anything yet. Soon, as Applebaum said, they'd be putting him in
Class A and sending him back to the treadmill, and he would not
have reconquered his courage, his dominion over himself. What a
coward he had been anyway, to submit. The man beside him kept
coughing. Andrews stared for a moment at the silhouette of the
yellow face on the pillow, with its pointed nose and small greedy
eyes. He thought of the swell undertaking establishment, of the
black gloves and long faces and soft tactful voices. That man and
his father before him lived by pretending things they didn't feel,
by swathing reality with all manner of crepe and trumpery. For
those people, no one ever died, they passed away, they deceased.
Still, there had to be undertakers. There was no more stain about
that than about any other trade. And it was so as not to spoil his
trade that the undertaker had enlisted, and to make the world safe
for democracy, too. The phrase came to Andrews's mind amid an
avalanche of popular tunes; of visions of patriotic numbers on the
vaudeville stage. He remembered the great flags waving triumphantly
over Fifth Avenue, and the crowds dutifully cheering. But those
were valid reasons for the undertaker; but for him, John Andrews,
were they valid reasons? No. He had no trade, he had not been
driven into the army by the force of public opinion, he had not
been carried away by any wave of blind confidence in the phrases of
bought propagandists. He had not had the strength to live. The
thought came to him of all those who, down the long tragedy of
history, had given themselves smilingly for the integrity of their
thoughts. He had not had the courage to move a muscle for his
freedom, but he had been fairly cheerful about risking his life as
a soldier, in a cause he believed useless. What right had a man to
exist who was too cowardly to stand up for what he thought and
felt, for his whole makeup, for everything that made him an
individual apart from his fellows, and not a slave to stand cap in
hand waiting for someone of stronger will to tell him to act?

Like a sudden nausea, disgust surged up in him. His mind ceased
formulating phrases and thoughts. He gave himself over to disgust
as a man who has drunk a great deal, holding on tight to the reins
of his will, suddenly gives himself over pellmell to drunkenness.

He lay very still, with his eyes closed, listening to the stir of
the ward, the voices of men talking and the fits of coughing that
shook the man next him. The smarting pain throbbed monotonously. He
felt hungry and wondered vaguely if it were supper time. How little
they gave you to eat in the hospital!

He called over to the man in the opposite cot:

"Hay, Stalky, what time is it?"

"It's after messtime now. Got a good appetite for the steak and
onions and French fried potatoes?"

"Shut up."

A rattling of tin dishes at the other end of the ward made Andrews
wriggle up further on his pillow. Verses from the "Shropshire Lad"
jingled mockingly through his head:

"The world, it was the old world yet,
 I was I, my things were wet,
 And nothing now remained to do
 But begin the game anew."

After he had eaten, he picked up the "Tentation de Saint Antoine,"
that lay on the cot beside his immovable legs, and buried himself
in it, reading the gorgeously modulated sentences voraciously, as
if the book were a drug in which he could drink deep forgetfulness
of himself.

He put the book down and closed his eyes. His mind was full of
intangible floating glow, like the ocean on a warm night, when
every wave breaks into pale flame, and mysterious milky lights keep
rising to the surface out of the dark waters and gleaming and
vanishing. He became absorbed in the strange fluid harmonies that
permeated his whole body, as a grey sky at nightfall suddenly
becomes filled with endlessly changing patterns of light and color
and shadow.

When he tried to seize hold of his thoughts, to give them definite
musical expression in his mind, he found himself suddenly empty,
the way a sandy inlet on the beach that has been full of shoals of
silver fishes, becomes suddenly empty when a shadow crosses the
water, and the man who is watching sees wanly his own reflection
instead of the flickering of thousands of tiny silver bodies.



John Andrews awoke to feel a cold hand on his head.

"Feeling all right?" said a voice in his ear.

He found himself looking in a puffy, middle-aged face, with a lean
nose and grey eyes, with dark rings under them. Andrews felt the
eyes looking him over inquisitively. He saw the red triangle on the
man's khaki sleeve.

"Yes," he said.

"If you don't mind, I'd like to talk to you a little while, buddy."

"Not a bit; have you got a chair?" said Andrews smiling.

"I don't suppose it was just right of me to wake you up, but you
see it was this way.... You were the next in line, an' I was afraid
I'd forget you, if I skipped you."

"I understand," said Andrews, with a sudden determination to take
the initiative away from the "Y" man.

"How long have you been in France? D'you like the war?" he asked
hurriedly.

The "Y" man smiled sadly.

"You seem pretty spry," he said. "I guess you're in a hurry to get
back at the front and get some more Huns." He smiled again, with an
air of indulgence.

Andrews did not answer.

"No, sonny, I don't like it here," the "Y" man said, after a pause.
"I wish I was home--but it's great to feel you're doing your duty."

"It must be," said Andrews.

"Have you heard about the great air raids our boys have pulled off?
They've bombarded Frankfort; now if they could only wipe Berlin off
the map."

"Say, d'you hate 'em awful hard?" said Andrews in a low voice.
"Because, if you do, I can tell you something will tickle you most
to death.... Lean over."

The "Y" man leant over curiously. "Some German prisoners come to
this hospital at six every night to get the garbage; now all you
need to do if you really hate 'em so bad is borrow a revolver from
one of your officer friends, and just shoot up the convoy...."

"Say...where were you raised, boy?" The "Y" man sat up suddenly
with a look of alarm on his face. "Don't you know that prisoners
are sacred?"

"D'you know what our colonel told us before going into the Argonne
offensive? The more prisoners we took, the less grub there'ld be;
and do you know what happened to the prisoners that were taken? Why
do you hate the Huns?"

"Because they are barbarians, enemies of civilization. You must
have enough education to know that," said the "Y" man, raising his
voice angrily. "What church do you belong to?"

"None."

"But you must have been connected with some church, boy. You can't
have been raised a heathen in America. Every Christian belongs or
has belonged to some church or other from baptism."

"I make no pretensions to Christianity."

Andrews closed his eyes and turned his head away. He could feel the
"Y" man hovering over him irresolutely. After a while he opened his
eyes. The "Y" man was leaning over the next bed.

Through the window at the opposite side of the ward he could see a
bit of blue sky among white scroll-like clouds, with mauve shadows.
He stared at it until the clouds, beginning to grow golden into
evening, covered it. Furious, hopeless irritation consumed him. How
these people enjoyed hating! At that rate it was better to be at
the front. Men were more humane when they were killing each other
than when they were talking about it. So was civilization nothing
but a vast edifice of sham, and the war, instead of its crumbling,
was its fullest and most ultimate expression. Oh, but there must be
something more in the world than greed and hatred and cruelty. Were
they all shams, too, these gigantic phrases that floated like gaudy
kites high above mankind? Kites, that was it, contraptions of tissue
paper held at the end of a string, ornaments not to be taken
seriously. He thought of all the long procession of men who had been
touched by the unutterable futility of the lives of men, who had
tried by phrases to make things  otherwise,  who  had  taught
unworldliness. Dim enigmatic figures they were--Democritus, Socrates,
Epicurus, Christ; so many of them, and so vague in the silvery mist
of history that he hardly knew that they were not his own imagining;
Lucretius, St. Francis, Voltaire, Rousseau, and how many others,
known and unknown, through the tragic centuries;  they had wept, some
of them, and some of them had laughed, and their phrases had risen
glittering, soap bubbles to dazzle men for a moment, and had shattered.
And he felt a crazy desire to join the forlorn ones, to throw himself
into inevitable defeat, to live his life as he saw it in spite of
everything, to proclaim once more the falseness of the gospels under
the cover of which greed and fear filled with more and yet more pain
the already unbearable agony of human life.

As soon as he got out of the hospital he would desert; the
determination formed suddenly in his mind, making the excited blood
surge gloriously through his body. There was nothing else to do; he
would desert. He pictured himself hobbling away in the dark on his
lame legs, stripping his uniform off, losing himself in some out of
the way corner of France, or slipping by the sentries to Spain and
freedom. He was ready to endure anything, to face any sort of
death, for the sake of a few months of liberty in which to forget
the degradation of this last year. This was his last run with the
pack.

An enormous exhilaration took hold of him. It seemed the first time
in his life he had ever determined to act. All the rest had been
aimless drifting. The blood sang m his ears. He fixed his eyes on
the half-obliterated figures that supported the shields under the
beams in the wall opposite. They seemed to be wriggling out of
their contorted positions and smiling encouragement to him.  He
imagined them, warriors out of old tales, on their way to clay
dragons  in enchanted woods, clever-fingered guildsmen and
artisans, cupids and satyrs and fauns, jumping from their niches
and carrying him off with them in a headlong rout, to a sound of
flutes, on a last forlorn assault on the citadels of pain.

The lights went out, and an orderly came round with chocolate that
poured with a pleasant soothing sound into the tin cups. With a
greasiness of chocolate in his mouth and the warmth of it in his
stomach, John Andrews went to sleep.



There was a stir in the ward when he woke up. Reddish sunlight
filtered in through the window opposite, and from outside came a
confused noise, a sound of bells ringing and whistles blowing.
Andrews looked past his feet towards Stalky's cot opposite. Stalky
was sitting bolt upright in bed, with his eyes round as quarters.

"Fellers, the war's over!"

"Put him out."

"Cut that."

"Pull the chain."

"Tie that bull outside," came from every side of the ward.

"Fellers," shouted Stalky louder than ever, "it's straight dope,
the war's over. I just dreamt the Kaiser came up to me on
Fourteenth Street and bummed a nickel for a glass of beer. The
war's over. Don't you hear the whistles?"

"All right; let's go home."

"Shut up, can't you let a feller sleep?"

The ward quieted down again, but all eyes were wide open, men lay
strangely still in their cots, waiting, wondering.

"All I can say," shouted Stalky again, "is that she was some war
while she lasted.... What did I tell yer?"

As he spoke the canvas screen in front of the door collapsed and
the major appeared with his cap askew over his red face and a brass
bell in his hand, which he rang frantically as he advanced into the
ward.

"Men," he shouted in the deep roar of one announcing baseball
scores, "the war ended at 4:03 A.M. this morning.... The Armistice
is signed. To hell with the Kaiser!" Then he rang the dinner bell
madly and danced along the aisle between the rows of cots, holding
the head nurse by one hand, who held a little yellow-headed
lieutenant by the other hand, who, in turn, held another nurse, and
so on. The line advanced jerkily into the ward; the front part was
singing "The Star Spangled Banner," and the rear the "Yanks are
Coming," and through it all the major rang his brass bell. The men
who were well enough sat up in bed and yelled. The others rolled
restlessly about, sickened by the din.

They made the circuit of the ward and filed out, leaving confusion
behind them. The dinner bell could be heard faintly in the other
parts of the building.

"Well, what d'you think of it, undertaker?" said Andrews.

"Nothing."

"Why?"

The undertaker turned his small black eyes on Andrews and looked
him straight in the face.

"You know what's the matter with me, don't yer, outside o' this
wound?"

"No."

"Coughing like I am, I'd think you'd be more observant. I got
t.b., young feller."

"How do you know that?"

"They're going to move me out o' here to a t.b. ward tomorrow."

"The hell they are!" Andrews's words were lost in the paroxysm of
coughing that seized the man next to him.

"Home, boys, home; it's home we want to be,"

Those well enough were singing, Stalky conducting, standing on the
end of his cot in his pink Red Cross pajamas, that were too short
and showed a long expanse of skinny leg, fuzzy with red hairs. He
banged together two bed pans to beat time.

"Home.... I won't never go home," said the undertaker when the
noise had subsided a little. "D'you know what I wish? I wish the
war'd gone on and on until everyone of them bastards had been
killed in it."

"Which bastards?"

"The men who got us fellers over here." He began coughing again
weakly.

"But they'll be safe if every other human being...." began
Andrews. He was interrupted by a thundering voice from the end of
the ward.

"Attention!"

"Home, boys, home; it's home we want to be,"

went on the song. Stalky glanced towards the end of the ward, and
seeing it was the major, dropped the bed pans that smashed at the
foot of his cot, and got as far as possible under his blankets.

"Attention!" thundered the major again. A sudden uncomfortable
silence fell upon the ward; broken only by the coughing of the man
next to Andrews.

"If I hear any more noise from this ward, I'll chuck everyone of
you men out of this hospital; if you can't walk you'll have to
crawl.... The war may be over, but you men are in the Army, and
don't you forget it."

The major glared up and down the lines of cots. He turned on his
heel and went out of the door, glancing angrily as he went at the
overturned screen. The ward was still. Outside whistles blew and
churchbells rang madly, and now and then there was a sound of
singing.



                               II

The snow beat against the windows and pattered on the tin roof of
the lean-to, built against the side of the hospital, that went by
the name of sun parlor. It was a dingy place, decorated by strings
of dusty little paper flags that one of the "Y" men had festooned
about the slanting beams of the ceiling to celebrate Christmas.
There were tables with torn magazines piled on them, and a counter
where cracked white cups were ranged waiting for one of the rare
occasions when cocoa could be bought. In the middle of the room,
against the wall of the main building, a stove was burning, about
which sat several men in hospital denims talking in drowsy voices.
Andrews watched them from his seat by the window, looking at their
broad backs bent over towards the stove and at the hands that hung
over their knees, limp from boredom. The air was heavy with a
smell of coal gas mixed with carbolic from men's clothes, and
stale cigarette smoke. Behind the cups at the counter a "Y" man, a
short, red-haired man with freckles, read the Paris edition of the
New York Herald. Andrews, in his seat by the window, felt
permeated by the stagnation about him: He had a sheaf of pencilled
music-papers on his knees, that he rolled and unrolled nervously,
staring at the stove and the motionless backs of the men about it.
The stove roared a little, the "Y" man's paper rustled, men's
voices came now and then in a drowsy whisper, and outside the snow
beat evenly and monotonously against the window panes. Andrews
pictured himself vaguely walking fast through the streets, with
the snow stinging his face and the life of a city swirling about
him, faces flushed by the cold, bright eyes under hatbrims,
looking for a second into his and passing on; slim forms of women
bundled in shawls that showed vaguely the outline of their breasts
and hips. He wondered if he would ever be free again to walk at
random through city streets. He stretched his legs out across the
floor in front of him; strange, stiff, tremulous legs they were,
but it was not the wounds that gave them their leaden weight. It
was the stagnation of the life about him that he felt sinking into
every crevice of his spirit, so that he could never shake it off,
the stagnation of dusty ruined automatons that had lost all life
of their own, whose limbs had practised the drill manual so long
that they had no movements of their own left, who sat limply, sunk
in boredom, waiting for orders.

Andrews was roused suddenly from his thoughts; he had been
watching the snowflakes in their glittering dance just outside the
window pane, when the sound of someone rubbing his hands very
close to him made him look up. A little man with chubby cheeks and
steel-grey hair very neatly flattened against his skull, stood at
the window rubbing his fat little white hands together and making
a faint unctuous puffing with each breath. Andrews noticed that a
white clerical collar enclosed the little man's pink neck, that
starched cuffs peeped from under the well-tailored sleeves of his
officer's uniform. Sam Brown belt and puttees, too, were highly
polished. On his shoulder was a demure little silver cross.
Andrews' glance had reached the pink cheeks again, when he
suddenly found a pair of steely eyes looking sharply into his.

"You look quite restored, my friend," said a chanting clerical
voice.

"I suppose I am."

"Splendid, splendid.... But do you mind moving into the end of the
room.... That's it." He followed Andrews, saying in a deprecatory tone:
"We're going to have just a little bit of a prayer and then I have
some interesting things to tell you boys."

The red-headed "Y" man had left his seat and stood in the center
of the room, his paper still dangling from his hand, saying in a
bored voice: "Please fellows, move down to the end.... Quiet,
please.... Quiet, please."

The soldiers shambled meekly to the folding chairs at the end of
the room and after some chattering were quiet. A couple of men
left, and several tiptoed in and sat in the front row. Andrews
sank into a chair with a despairing sort of resignation, and
burying his face in his hands stared at the floor between his
feet.

"Fellers," went on the bored voice of the "Y" man, "let me
introduce the Reverend Dr. Skinner, who--" the "Y" man's voice
suddenly took on deep patriotic emotion--"who has just come back
from the Army of Occupation in Germany."

At the words "Army of Occupation," as if a spring had been
touched, everybody clapped and cheered.

The Reverend Dr. Skinner looked about his audience with smiling
confidence and raised his hands for silence, so that the men could
see the chubby pink palms.

"First, boys, my dear friends, let us indulge in a few moments of
silent prayer to our Great Creator," his voice rose and fell in
the suave chant of one accustomed to going through the episcopal
liturgy for the edification of well-dressed and well-fed
congregations. "Inasmuch as He has vouchsafed us safety and a
mitigation of our afflictions, and let us pray that in His good
time He may see fit to return us whole in limb and pure in heart
to our families, to the wives, mothers, and to those whom we will
some day honor with the name of wife, who eagerly await our
return; and that we may spend the remainder of our lives in useful
service of the great country for whose safety and glory we have
offered up our youth a willing sacrifice.... Let us pray!"

Silence fell dully on the room. Andrews could hear the self-
conscious breathing of the men about him, and the rustling of the
snow against the tin roof. A few feet scraped. The voice began
again after a long pause, chanting:

"Our Father which art in Heaven..."

At the "Amen" everyone lifted his head cheerfully. Throats were
cleared, chairs scraped. Men settled themselves to listen.

"Now, my friends, I am going to give you in a few brief words a
little glimpse into Germany, so that you may be able to picture to
yourselves the way your comrades of the Army of Occupation manage
to make themselves comfortable among the Huns.... I ate my
Christmas dinner in Coblenz. What do you think of that? Never had
I thought that a Christmas would find me away from my home and
loved ones. But what unexpected things happen to us in this world!
Christmas in Coblenz under the American flag!"

He paused a moment to allow a little scattered clapping to
subside.

"The turkey was fine, too, I can tell you.... Yes, our boys in
Germany are very, very comfortable, and just waiting for the word,
if necessary, to continue their glorious advance to Berlin. For I
am sorry to say, boys, that the Germans have not undergone the
change of heart for which we had hoped. They have, indeed, changed
the name of their institutions, but their spirit they have not
changed.... How grave a disappointment it must be to our great
President, who has exerted himself so to bring the German people
to reason, to make them understand the horror that they alone have
brought deliberately upon the world! Alas! Far from it. Indeed,
they have attempted with insidious propaganda to undermine the
morale of our troops...." A little storm of muttered epithets went
through the room. The Reverend Dr. Skinner elevated his chubby
pink palms and smiled benignantly..."to undermine the morale of
our troops; so that the most stringent regulations have had to be
made by the commanding general to prevent it. Indeed, my friends,
I very much fear that we stopped too soon in our victorious
advance; that Germany should have been utterly crushed. But all
we can do is watch and wait, and abide by the decision of those
great men who in a short time will be gathered together at the
Conference at Paris.... Let me, boys, my dear friends, express
the hope that you may speedily be cured of your wounds, ready
again to do willing service in the ranks of the glorious army that
must be vigilant for some time yet, I fear, to defend, as Americans
and Christians, the civilization you have so nobly saved from a
ruthless foe.... Let us all join together in singing the hymn,
'Stand up, stand up for Jesus,' which I am sure you all know."

The men got to their feet, except for a few who had lost their
legs, and sang the first verse of the hymn unsteadily. The second
verse petered out altogether, leaving only the "Y" man and the
Reverend Dr. Skinner singing away at the top of their lungs.

The Reverend Dr. Skinner pulled out his gold watch and looked at
it frowning.

"Oh, my, I shall miss the train," he muttered. The "Y" man helped
him into his voluminous trench coat and they both hurried out of
the door.

"Those are some puttees he had on, I'll tell you," said the
legless man who was propped in a chair near the stove.

Andrews sat down beside him, laughing. He was a man with high
cheekbones and powerful jaws to whose face the pale brown eyes
and delicately pencilled lips gave a look of great gentleness.
Andrews did not look at his body.

"Somebody said he was a Red Cross man giving out cigarettes....
Fooled us that time," said Andrews.

"Have a butt? I've got one," said the legless man. With a large
shrunken hand that was the transparent color of alabaster he held
out a box of cigarettes.

"Thanks." When Andrews struck a match he had to lean over the
legless man to light his cigarette for him. He could not help
glancing down the man's tunic at the drab trousers that hung
limply from the chair. A cold shudder went through him; he was
thinking of the zigzag scars on his own thighs.

"Did you get it in the legs, too, Buddy?" asked the legless man,
quietly.

"Yes, but I had luck.... How long have you been here?"

"Since Christ was a corporal. Oh, I doan know. I've been here
since two weeks after my outfit first went into the lines.... That
was on November 16th, 1917.... Didn't see much of the war, did
I?... Still, I guess I didn't miss much."

"No.... But you've seen enough of the army."

"That's true.... I guess I wouldn't mind the war if it wasn't for
the army."

"They'll be sending you home soon, won't they?"

"Guess so.... Where are you from?"

"New York," said Andrews.

"I'm from Cranston, Wisconsin. D'you know that country? It's a
great country for lakes. You can canoe for days an' days without a
portage. We have a camp on Big Loon Lake. We used to have some
wonderful times there...lived like wild men. I went for a trip for
three weeks once without seeing a house. Ever done much canoeing?"

"Not so much as I'd like to."

"That's the thing to make you feel fit. First thing you do when
you shake out of your blankets is jump in an' have a swim. Gee,
it's great to swim when the morning mist is still on the water an'
the sun just strikes the tops of the birch trees. Ever smelt bacon
cooking? I mean out in the woods, in a frying pan over some sticks
of pine and beech wood.... Some great old smell, isn't it?... And
after you've paddled all day, an' feel tired and sunburned right
to the palms of your feet, to sit around the fire with some trout
roastin' in the ashes and hear the sizzlin' the bacon makes in the
pan.... O boy!" He stretched his arms wide.

"God, I'd like to have wrung that damn little parson's neck," said
Andrews suddenly.

"Would you?" The legless man turned brown eyes on Andrews with a
smile. "I guess he's about as much to blame as anybody is...guys
like him.... I guess they have that kind in Germany, too."

"You don't think we've made the world quite as safe for Democracy
as it might be?" said Andrews in a low voice.

"Hell, how should I know? I bet you never drove an ice
wagon.... I did, all one summer down home.... It was some life.
Get up at three o'clock in the morning an' carry a hundred or two
hundred pounds of ice into everybody's ice box. That was the life
to make a feller feel fit. I was goin' around with a big Norwegian
named Olaf, who was the strongest man I ever knew. An' drink! He
was the boy could drink. I once saw him put away twenty-five dry
Martini cocktails an' swim across the lake on top of it.... I used
to weigh a hundred and eighty pounds, and he could pick me up with
one hand and put me across his shoulder.... That was the life to
make a feller feel fit. Why, after bein' out late the night
before, we'd jump up out of bed at three o'clock feeling springy
as a cat."

"What's he doing now?" asked Andrews.

"He died on the transport coming 'cross here. Died of the
flu.... I met a feller came over in his regiment. They dropped him
overboard when they were in sight of the Azores.... Well, I didn't
die of the flu. Have another butt?"

"No, thanks," said Andrews.

They were silent. The fire roared in the stove. No one was
talking. The men lolled in chairs somnolently. Now and then
someone spat. Outside of the window Andrews could see the soft
white dancing of the snowflakes. His limbs felt very heavy; his
mind was permeated with dusty stagnation like the stagnation of
old garrets and lumber rooms, where, among superannuated bits of
machinery and cracked grimy crockery, lie heaps of broken toys.



John Andrews sat on a bench in a square full of linden trees, with
the pale winter sunshine full on his face and hands. He had been
looking up through his eyelashes at the sun, that was the color of
honey, and he let his dazzled glance sink slowly through the black
lacework of twigs, down the green trunks of the trees to the bench
opposite where sat two nursemaids and, between them, a tiny girl
with a face daintily colored and lifeless like a doll's face, and
a frilled dress under which showed small ivory knees and legs
encased in white socks and yellow sandals. Above the yellow halo
of her hair floated, with the sun shining through it, as through a
glass of claret, a bright carmine balloon which the child held by
a string. Andrews looked at her for a long time, enraptured by the
absurd daintiness of the figure between the big bundles of flesh
of the nursemaids. The thought came to him suddenly that months
had gone by,--was it only months?--since his hands had touched
anything soft, since he had seen any flowers. The last was a
flower an old woman had given him in a village in the Argonne, an
orange marigold, and he remembered how soft the old woman's
withered lips had been against his cheek when she had leaned over
and kissed him. His mind suddenly lit up, as with a strain of
music, with a sense of the sweetness of quiet lives worn away
monotonously in the fields, in the grey little provincial towns,
in old kitchens full of fragrance of herbs and tang of smoke from
the hearth, where there are pots on the window-sill full of basil
in flower.

Something made him go up to the little girl and take her hand. The
child, looking up suddenly and seeing a lanky soldier with pale
lean face and light, straw-colored hair escaping from under a cap
too small for him, shrieked and let go the string of the balloon,
which soared slowly into the air trembling a little in the faint
cool wind that blew. The child wailed dismally, and Andrews,
quailing under the furious glances of the nursemaids, stood before
her, flushed crimson, stammering apologies, not knowing what to
do. The white caps of the nursemaids bent over and ribbons
fluttered about the child's head as they tried to console her.
Andrews walked away dejectedly, now and then looking up at the
balloon, which soared, a black speck against the grey and topaz-
colored clouds.

"Sale Americain!" he heard one nursemaid exclaim to the other.
But this was the first hour in months he had had free, the first
moment of solitude; he must live; soon he would be sent back to
his division. A wave of desire for furious fleshly enjoyments went
through him, making him want steaming dishes of food drenched in
rich, spice-flavored sauces; making him want to get drunk on
strong wine; to roll on thick carpets in the arms of naked,
libidinous women. He was walking down the quiet grey street of the
provincial town, with its low houses with red chimney pots, and
blue slate roofs and its irregular yellowish cobbles. A clock
somewhere was striking four with deep booming strokes, Andrews
laughed. He had to be in hospital at six. Already he was tired;
his legs ached.

The window of a pastry shop appeared invitingly before him,
denuded as it was by wartime. A sign in English said: "Tea."
Walking in, he sat down in a fussy little parlor where the tables
had red cloths, and a print, in pinkish and greenish colors, hung
in the middle of the imitation brocade paper of each wall. Under a
print of a poster bed with curtains in front of which eighteen to
twenty people bowed, with the title of "Secret d'Amour," sat three
young officers, who cast cold, irritated glances at this private
with a hospital badge on who invaded their tea shop. Andrews
stared back at them, flaming with dull anger.

Sipping the hot, fragrant tea, he sat with a blank sheet of music
paper before him, listening in spite of himself to what the
officers were saying. They were talking about Ronsard. It was with
irritated surprise that Andrews heard the name. What right had
they to be talking about Ronsard? He knew more about Ronsard than
they did. Furious, conceited phrases kept surging up in his mind.
He was as sensitive, as humane, as intelligent, as well-read as
they were; what right had they to the cold suspicious glance with
which they had put him in his place when he had come into the
room? Yet that had probably been as unconscious, as unavoidable as
was his own biting envy. The thought that if one of those men
should come over to him, he would have to stand up and salute and
answer humbly, not from civility, but from the fear of being
punished, was bitter as wormwood, filled him with a childish
desire--to prove his worth to them, as when older boys had ill-
treated him at school and he had prayed to have the house burn
down so that he might heroically save them all. There was a piano
in an inner room, where in the dark the chairs, upside down,
perched dismally on the table tops. He almost obeyed an impulse to
go in there and start playing, by the brilliance of his playing to
force these men, who thought of him as a coarse automaton,
something between a man and a dog, to recognize him as an equal, a
superior.

"But the war's over. I want to start living. Red wine, streets of
the nightingale cries to the rose," said one of the officers.

"What do you say we go A.W.O.L. to Paris?"

"Dangerous."

"Well, what can they do? We are not enlisted men; they can only
send us home. That's just what I want."

"I'll tell you what; we'll go to the Cochon Bleu and have a
cocktail and think about it."

"The lion and the lizard keep their courts where...what the devil
was his name? Anyway, we'll glory and drink deep, while Major
Peabody keeps his court in Dijon to his heart's content."

Spurs jingled as the three officers went out. A fierce disgust
took possession of John Andrews. He was ashamed of his spiteful
irritation. If, when he had been playing the piano to a roomful of
friends in New York, a man dressed as a laborer had shambled in,
wouldn't he have felt a moment of involuntary scorn? It was
inevitable that the fortunate should hate the unfortunate because
they feared them. But he was so tired of all those thoughts.
Drinking down the last of his tea at a gulp, he went into the shop
to ask the old woman, with little black whiskers over her
bloodless lips, who sat behind the white desk at the end of the
counter, if she minded his playing the piano.

In the deserted tea room, among the dismal upturned chairs,
his crassened fingers moved stiffly over the keys. He forgot
everything else. Locked doors in his mind were swinging wide,
revealing forgotten sumptuous halls of his imagination. The Queen
of Sheba, grotesque as a satyr, white and flaming with worlds of
desire, as the great implacable Aphrodite, stood with her hand on
his shoulder sending shivers of warm sweetness rippling through
his body, while her voice intoned in his ears all the
inexhaustible voluptuousness of life.

An asthmatic clock struck somewhere in the obscurity of the room.
"Seven!" John Andrews paid, said good-bye to the old woman with
the mustache, and hurried out into the street. "Like Cinderella at
the ball," he thought. As he went towards the hospital, down
faintly lighted streets, his steps got slower and slower. "Why go
back?" a voice kept saying inside him. "Anything is better than
that." Better throw himself in the river, even, than go back. He
could see the olive-drab clothes in a heap among the dry
bullrushes on the river bank.... He thought of himself crashing
naked through the film of ice into water black as Chinese lacquer.
And when he climbed out numb and panting on the other side,
wouldn't he be able to take up life again as if he had just been
born? How strong he would be if he could begin life a second time!
How madly, how joyously he would live now that there was no more
war.... He had reached the door of the hospital. Furious shudders
of disgust went through him.

He  was   standing  dumbly  humble  while a sergeant bawled him
out for being late.



Andrews stared for a long while at the line of shields that
supported the dark ceiling beams on the wall opposite his cot. The
emblems had been erased and the grey stone figures that crowded
under the shields,--the satyr with his shaggy goat's legs, the
townsman with his square hat, the warrior with the sword between
his legs,--had been clipped and scratched long ago in other wars.
In the strong afternoon light they were so dilapidated he could
hardly make them out. He wondered how they had seemed so vivid to
him when he had lain in his cot, comforted by their comradeship,
while his healing wounds itched and tingled. Still he glanced
tenderly at the grey stone figures as he left the ward.

Downstairs in the office where the atmosphere was stuffy with a
smell of varnish and dusty papers and cigarette smoke, he waited a
long time, shifting his weight restlessly from one foot to the
other.

"What do you want?" said a red-haired sergeant, without looking up
from the pile of papers on his desk.

"Waiting for travel orders."

"Aren't you the guy I told to come back at three?"

"It is three."

"H'm!" The sergeant kept his eyes fixed on the papers, which
rustled as he moved them from one pile to another. In the end of
the room a typewriter clicked slowly and jerkily. Andrews  could
see the dark back of a head between bored shoulders in a woolen
shirt leaning over the machine. Beside the cylindrical black stove
against the wall a man with large mustaches and the complicated
stripes of a hospital sergeant was reading a novel in a red cover.
After a long silence the red-headed sergeant looked up from his
papers and said suddenly:

"Ted."

The man at the typewriter turned slowly round, showing a large red
face and blue eyes.

"We-ell," he drawled.

"Go in an' see if the loot has signed them papers yet."

The man got up, stretched himself deliberately, and slouched out
through a door beside the stove. The red-haired sergeant leaned
back in his swivel chair and lit a cigarette.

"Hell," he said, yawning.

The man with the mustache beside the stove let the book slip from
his knees to the floor, and yawned too.

"This goddam armistice sure does take the ambition out of a
feller," he said.

"Hell of a note," said the red-haired sergeant. "D'you know that
they had my name in for an O.T.C.? Hell of a note goin' home
without a Sam Browne."

The other man came back and sank down into his chair in front of
the typewriter again. The slow, jerky clicking recommenced.

Andrews made a scraping noise with his foot on the ground.

"Well, what about that travel order?" said the red-haired
sergeant.

"Loot's out," said the other man, still typewriting.

"Well, didn't he leave it on his desk?" shouted the red-haired
sergeant angrily.

"Couldn't find it."

"I suppose I've got to go look for it.... God!" The red-haired
sergeant stamped out of the room. A moment later he came back with
a bunch of papers in his hand.

"Your name Jones?" he snapped to Andrews.

"No."

"Snivisky?"

"No.... Andrews, John."

"Why the hell couldn't you say so?"

The man with the mustaches beside the stove got to his feet
suddenly. An alert, smiling expression came over his face.

"Good afternoon, Captain Higginsworth," he said cheerfully.

An oval man with a cigar slanting out of his broad mouth came into
the room. When he talked the cigar wobbled in his mouth. He wore
greenish kid gloves, very tight for his large hands, and his
puttees shone with a dark lustre like mahogany.

The red-haired sergeant turned round and half-saluted.

"Goin' to another swell party, Captain?" he asked.

The Captain grinned.

"Say, have you boys got any Red Cross cigarettes? I ain't only got
cigars, an' you can't hand a cigar to a lady, can you?" The
Captain grinned again. An appreciative giggle went round.

"Will a couple of packages do you? Because I've got some here,"
said the red-haired sergeant reaching in the drawer of his desk.

"Fine." The captain slipped them into his pocket and swaggered out
doing up the buttons of his buff-colored coat.

The sergeant settled himself at his desk again with an important
smile.

"Did you find the travel order?" asked Andrews timidly. "I'm
supposed to take the train at four-two."

"Can't make it.... Did you say your name was Anderson?"

"Andrews.... John Andrews."

"Here it is.... Why didn't you come earlier?"



The sharp air of the ruddy winter evening, sparkling in John
Andrews's nostrils, vastly refreshing after the stale odors of the
hospital, gave him a sense of liberation. Walking with rapid steps
through the grey streets of the town, where in windows lamps
already glowed orange, he kept telling himself that another epoch
was closed. It was with relief that he felt that he would never
see the hospital again or any of the people in it. He thought of
Chrisfield. It was weeks and weeks since Chrisfield had come to
his mind at all. Now it was with a sudden clench of affection that
the Indiana boy's face rose up before him. An oval, heavily-tanned
face with a little of childish roundness about it yet, with black
eyebrows and long black eyelashes. But he did not even know if
Chrisfield were still alive. Furious joy took possession of him.
He, John Andrews, was alive; what did it matter if everyone he
knew died? There were jollier companions than ever he had known,
to be found in the world, cleverer people to talk to, more
vigorous people to learn from. The cold air circulated through his
nose and lungs; his arms felt strong and supple; he could feel the
muscles of his legs stretch and contract as he walked, while his
feet beat jauntily on the irregular cobblestones of the street.
The waiting room at the station was cold and stuffy, full of a
smell of breathed air and unclean uniforms. French soldiers
wrapped in their long blue coats, slept on the benches or stood
about in groups, eating bread and drinking from their canteens. A
gas lamp in the center gave dingy light. Andrews settled himself
in a corner with despairing resignation. He had five hours to wait
for a train, and already his legs ached and he had a side feeling
of exhaustion. The exhilaration of leaving the hospital and
walking free through wine-tinted streets in the sparkling evening
air gave way gradually to despair. His life would continue to be
this slavery of unclean bodies packed together in places where the
air had been breathed over and over, cogs in the great slow-moving
Juggernaut of armies. What did it matter if the fighting had
stopped? The armies would go on grinding out lives with lives,
crushing flesh with flesh. Would he ever again stand free and
solitary to live out joyous hours which would make up for all the
boredom of the treadmill? He had no hope. His life would continue
like this dingy, ill-smelling waiting room where men in uniform
slept in the fetid air until they should be ordered-out to march
or to stand in motionless rows, endlessly, futilely, like toy
soldiers a child has forgotten in an attic.

Andrews got up suddenly and went out on the empty platform. A cold
wind blew. Somewhere out in the freight yards an engine puffed
loudly, and clouds of white steam drifted through the faintly
lighted station. He was walking up and down with his chin sunk
into his coat and his hands in his pockets, when somebody ran into
him.

"Damn," said a voice, and the figure darted through a grimy glass
door that bore the sign: "Buvette." Andrews followed absent-mindedly.

"I'm sorry I ran into you.... I thought you were an M.P., that's
why I beat it." When he spoke, the man, an American private,
turned and looked searchingly in Andrews's face. He had very red
cheeks and an impudent little brown mustache. He spoke slowly with
a faint Bostonian drawl.

"That's nothing," said Andrews.

"Let's have a drink," said the other man. "I'm A.W.O.L. Where are
you going?"

"To some place near Bar-le-Duc, back to my Division. Been in
hospital."

"Long?"

"Since October."

"Gee.... Have some Curacoa. It'll do you good. You look pale....
My name's Henslowe. Ambulance with the French Army."

They sat down at an unwashed marble table where the soot from the
trains made a pattern sticking to the rings left by wine and
liqueur glasses.

"I'm going to Paris," said Henslowe. "My leave expired three days
ago. I'm going to Paris and get taken ill with peritonitis or
double pneumonia, or maybe I'll have a cardiac lesion.... The
army's a bore."

"Hospital isn't any better," said Andrews with a sigh. "Though I
shall never forget the night with which I realized I was wounded
and out of it. I thought I was bad enough to be sent home."

"Why, I wouldn't have missed a minute of the war.... But now that
it's over...Hell! Travel is the password now. I've just had two
weeks in the Pyrenees. Nimes, Arles, Les Baux, Carcassonne,
Perpignan, Lourdes, Gavarnie, Toulouse! What do you think of that
for a trip?... What were you in?"

"Infantry."

"Must have been hell."

"Been! It is."

"Why don't you come to Paris with me?"

"I don't want to be picked up," stammered Andrews.

"Not a chance.... I know the ropes.... All you have to do is keep
away from the Olympia and the railway stations, walk fast and keep
your shoes shined...and you've got wits, haven't you?"

"Not many.... Let's drink a bottle of wine. Isn't there anything
to eat to be got here?"

"Not a damn thing, and I daren't go out of the station on account
of the M.P. at the gate.... There'll be a diner on the Marseilles
express."

"But I can't go to Paris."

"Sure.... Look, how do you call yourself?"

"John Andrews."

"Well, John Andrews, all I can say is that you've let 'em get your
goat. Don't give in. Have a good time, in spite of 'em. To hell
with 'em." He brought the bottle down so hard on the table that it
broke and the purple wine flowed over the dirty marble and dripped
gleaming on the floor.

Some French soldiers who stood in a group round the bar turned
round.

"V'la un gars qui gaspille le bon vin," said a tall red-faced man,
with long sloping whiskers.

"Pour vingt sous j'mangerai la bouteille," cried a little man
lurching forward and leaning drunkenly over the table.

"Done," said Henslowe. "Say, Andrews, he says he'll eat the bottle
for a franc."

He placed a shining silver franc on the table beside the remnants
of the broken bottle. The man seized the neck of the bottle in a
black, claw-like hand and gave it a preparatory flourish. He was a
cadaverous little man, incredibly dirty, with mustaches and beard
of a moth-eaten tow-color, and a purple flush on his cheeks. His
uniform was clotted with mud. When the others crowded round him
and tried to dissuade him, he said: "M'en fous, c'est mon metier,"
and rolled his eyes so that the whites flashed in the dim light
like the eyes of dead codfish.

"Why, he's really going to do it," cried Henslowe.

The man's teeth flashed and crunched down on the jagged edge of
the glass. There was a terrific crackling noise. He flourished the
bottle-end again.

"My God, he's eating it," cried Henslowe, roaring with laughter,
"and you're afraid to go to Paris."

An engine rumbled into the station, with a great hiss of escaping
steam.

"Gee, that's the Paris train! Tiens!" He pressed the franc into
the man's dirt-crusted hand.

"Come along, Andrews."

As they left the buvette they heard again the crunching crackling
noise as the man bit another piece off the bottle.

Andrews followed Henslowe across the steam-filled platform to the
door of a first-class carriage. They climbed in. Henslowe
immediately pulled down the black cloth over the half globe of the
light. The compartment was empty. He threw himself down with a
sigh of comfort on the soft buff-colored cushions of the seat.

"But what on earth?" stammered Andrews.

"M'en fous, c'est mon metier," interrupted Henslowe.

The train pulled out of the station.



                               III

Henslowe poured wine from a brown earthen crock into the glasses,
where it shimmered a bright thin red, the color of currants.
Andrews leaned back in his chair and looked through half-closed
eyes at the table with its white cloth and little burnt umber
loaves of bread, and out of the window at the square dimly lit by
lemon-yellow gas lamps and at the dark gables of the little houses
that huddled round it.

At a table against the wall opposite a lame boy, with white
beardless face and gentle violet-colored eyes, sat very close to
the bareheaded girl who was with him and who never took her eyes
off his face, leaning on his crutch all the while. A stove hummed
faintly in the middle of the room, and from the half-open kitchen
door came ruddy light and the sound of something frying. On the
wall, in brownish colors that seemed to have taken warmth from all
the rich scents of food they had absorbed since the day of their
painting, were scenes of the Butte as it was fancied to have once
been, with windmills and wide fields.

"I want to travel," Henslowe was saying, dragging out his words
drowsily. "Abyssinia, Patagonia, Turkestan, the Caucasus, anywhere
and everywhere. What do you say you and I go out to New Zealand
and raise sheep?"

"But why not stay here? There can't be anywhere as wonderful as
this."

"Then I'll put off starting for New Guinea for a week. But hell,
I'd go crazy staying anywhere after this. It's got into my
blood...all this murder. It's made a wanderer of me, that's what
it's done. I'm an adventurer."

"God, I wish it had made me into anything so interesting."

"Tie a rock on to your scruples and throw 'em off the Pont Neuf
and set out.... O boy, this is the golden age for living by your
wits."

"You're not out of the army yet."

"I should worry.... I'll join the Red Cross."

"How?"

"I've got a tip about it."

A girl with oval face and faint black down on her upper lip
brought them soup, a thick greenish colored soup, that steamed
richly into their faces.

"If you tell me how I can get out of the army you'll probably save
my life," said Andrews seriously.

"There are two ways...Oh, but let me tell you later. Let's talk
about something worth while...So you write music do you?"

Andrews nodded.

An omelet lay between them, pale golden-yellow with flecks of
green; a few amber bubbles of burnt butter still clustered round
the edges.

"Talk about tone-poems," said Henslowe.

"But, if you are an adventurer and have no scruples, how is it you
are still a private?"

Henslowe took a gulp of wine and laughed uproariously.

"That's the joke."

They ate in silence for a little while. They could hear the couple
opposite them talking in low soft voices. The stove purred, and
from the kitchen came a sound of something being beaten in a bowl.
Andrews leaned back in his chair.

"This is so wonderfully quiet and mellow," he said.... It is so
easy to forget that there's any joy at all in life."

"Rot...It's a circus parade."

"Have you ever seen anything drearier than a circus parade? One of
those jokes that aren't funny."

"Justine, encore du vin," called Henslowe.

"So you know her name?"

"I live here.... The Butte is the boss on the middle of the
shield. It's the axle of the wheel. That's why it's so quiet, like
the centre of a cyclone, of a vast whirling rotary circus parade!"

Justine, with her red hands that had washed so many dishes off
which other people had dined well, put down between them a scarlet
langouste, of which claws and feelers sprawled over the table-
cloth that already had a few purplish stains of wine. The sauce
was yellow and fluffy like the breast of a canary bird.

"D'you know," said Andrews suddenly talking fast and excitedly
while he brushed the straggling yellow hair off his forehead, "I'd
almost be willing to be shot at the end of a year if I could live
up here all that time with a piano and a million sheets of music
paper...It would be worth it."

"But this is a place to come back to. Imagine coming back here
after the highlands of Thibet, where you'd nearly got drowned and
scalped and had made love to the daughter of an Afghan chief...
who had red lips smeared with loukoumi so that the sweet taste
stayed in your mouth." Henslowe stroked softly his little brown
mustache.

"But what's the use of just seeing and feeling things if you can't
express them?"

"What's the use of living at all? For the fun of it, man; damn
ends."

"But the only profound fun I ever have is that..." Andrews's voice
broke. "O God, I would give up every joy in the world if I could
turn out one page that I felt was adequate.... D'you know it's
years since I've talked to anybody?"

They both stared silently out of the window at the fog that was
packed tightly against it like cotton wool, only softer, and a
greenish-gold color.

"The M.P.'s sure won't get us tonight," said Henslowe, banging his
fist jauntily on the table. "I've a great mind to go to Rue St.
Anne and leave my card on the Provost Marshal.... God damn! D'you
remember that man who took the bite out of our wine-bottle ...He
didn't give a  hoot in hell, did he? Talk about expression. Why
don't you express that? I think that's the turning point of your
career. That's what made you come to Paris; you can't deny it."

They both laughed loudly rolling about on their chairs.

Andrews caught glints of contagion in the pale violet eyes of the
lame boy and in the dark eyes of the girl.

"Let's tell them about it," he said still laughing, with his face,
bloodless after the months in hospital, suddenly flushed.

"Salut," said Henslowe turning round and elevating his glass.
"Nous rions parceque nous sommes gris de vin gris." Then he told
them about the man who ate glass. He got to his feet and recounted
slowly in his drawling voice, with gestures. Justine stood by with
a dish full of stuffed tomatoes of which the red skins showed
vaguely through a mantle of dark brown sauce. When she smiled her
cheeks puffed out and gave her face a little of the look of a
white cat's.

"And you live here?" asked Andrews after they had all laughed.

"Always. It is not often that I go down to town.... It's so
difficult.... I have a withered leg." He smiled brilliantly like a
child telling about a new toy.

"And you?"

"How could I be anywhere else?" answered the girl. "It's a
misfortune, but there it is." She tapped with the crutch on the
floor, making a sound like someone walking with it. The boy
laughed and tightened his arm round her shoulder.

"I should like to live here," said Andrews simply.

"Why don't you?"

"But don't you see he's a soldier," whispered the girl hurriedly.

A frown wrinkled the boy's forehead.

"Well, it wasn't by choice, I suppose," he said.

Andrews was silent. Unaccountable shame took possession of him
before these people who had never been soldiers, who would never
be soldiers.

"The Greeks used to say," he said bitterly, using as phrase that
had been a long time on his mind, "that when a man became a slave,
on the first day he lost one-half of his virtue."

"When a man becomes a slave," repeated the lame boy softly, "on
the first day he loses one-half of his virtue."

"What's the use of virtue? It is love you need," said the girl.

"I've eaten your tomato, friend Andrews," said Henslowe. "Justine
will get us some more." He poured out the last of the wine that
half filled each of the glasses with its thin sparkle, the color
of red currants.

Outside the fog had blotted everything out in even darkness which
grew vaguely yellow and red near the sparsely scattered street
lamps. Andrews and Henslowe felt their way blindly down the long
gleaming flights of steps that led from the quiet darkness of the
Butte towards the confused lights and noises of more crowded
streets. The fog caught in their throats and tingled in their
noses and brushed against their cheeks like moist hands.

"Why did we go away from that restaurant? I'd like to have talked
to those people some more," said Andrews.

"We  haven't had  any  coffee  either.... But,  man, we're in
Paris. We're not going to be here long. We can't afford to stay
all the time in one place.... It's nearly closing time
already...."

"The boy was a painter. He said he lived by making toys; he
whittles out wooden elephants and camels for Noah's Arks.... Did
you hear that?"

They were walking fast down a straight, sloping street. Below them
already appeared the golden glare of a boulevard.

Andrews went on talking, almost to himself. "What a wonderful life
that would be to live up here in a small room that would overlook
the great rosy grey expanse of the city, to have some absurd work
like that to live on, and to spend all your spare time working and
going to concerts.... A quiet mellow existence.... Think of my
life beside it. Slaving in that iron, metallic, brazen New York to
write ineptitudes about music in the Sunday paper. God! And this."

They were sitting down at a table in a noisy cafe, full of yellow
light flashing in eyes and on glasses and bottles, of red lips
crushed against the thin hard rims of glasses.

"Wouldn't you like to just rip it off?" Andrews jerked at his
tunic with both hands where it bulged out over his chest. "Oh, I'd
like to make the buttons fly all over the cafe, smashing the
liqueur glasses, snapping in the faces of all those dandified
French officers who look so proud of themselves that they survived
long enough to be victorious."

"The coffee's famous here," said Henslowe. "The only place I ever
had it better was at a bistro in Nice on this last permission."

"Somewhere else again!"

"That's it.... For ever and ever, somewhere else! Let's have some
prunelle. Before the war prunelle."

The waiter was a solemn man, with a beard cut like a prime
minister's. He came with the bottle held out before him,
religiously lifted. His lips pursed with an air of intense
application, while he poured the white glinting liquid into the
glasses. When he had finished he held the bottle upside down with
a tragic gesture; not a drop came out.

"It is the end of the good old times," he said.

"Damnation to the good old times," said Henslowe. "Here's to the
good old new roughhousy circus parades."

"I wonder how many people they are good for, those circus parades
of yours," said Andrews.

"Where are you going to spend the night?" said Henslowe.

"I don't know.... I suppose I can find a hotel or something."

"Why don't you come with me and see Berthe; she probably has
friends."

"I want to wander about alone, not that I scorn Berthe's friends,"
said Andrews...."But I am so greedy for solitude."



John Andrews was walking alone down streets full of drifting fog.
Now and then a taxi dashed past him and clattered off into the
obscurity. Scattered groups of people, their footsteps hollow in
the muffling fog, floated about him. He did not care which way he
walked, but went on and on, crossing large crowded avenues where
the lights embroidered patterns of gold and orange on the fog,
rolling in wide deserted squares, diving into narrow streets where
other steps sounded sharply for a second now and then and faded
leaving nothing in his ears when he stopped still to listen but
the city's distant muffled breathing. At last he came out along
the river, where the fog was densest and coldest and where he
could hear faintly the sound of water gurgling past the piers of
bridges. The glow of the lights glared and dimmed, glared and
dimmed, as he walked along, and sometimes he could make out the
bare branches of trees blurred across the halos of the lamps. The
fog caressed him soothingly and shadows kept flicking past him,
giving him glimpses of smooth curves of cheeks and glints of eyes
bright from the mist and darkness. Friendly, familiar people
seemed to fill the fog just out of his sight. The muffled murmur
of the city stirred him like the sound of the voices of friends.

"From the girl at the cross-roads singing under her street-lamp to
the patrician pulling roses to pieces from the height of her
litter... all the imagining of your desire...."

The murmur of life about him kept forming itself into long
modulated sentences in his ears,--sentences that gave him by their
form a sense of quiet well-being as if he were looking at a low
relief of people dancing, carved out of Parian in some workshop in
Attica.

Once he stopped and leaned for a long while against the moisture-
beaded stern of a street-lamp. Two shadows defined, as they
strolled towards him, into the forms of a pale boy and a
bareheaded girl, walking tightly laced in each other's arms. The
boy limped a little and his violet eyes were contracted to
wistfulness. John Andrews was suddenly filled with throbbing
expectation, as if those two would come up to him and put their
hands on his arms and make some revelation of vast import to his
life. But when they reached the full glow of the lamp, Andrews saw
that he was mistaken. They were not the boy and girl he had talked
to on the Butte.

He walked off hurriedly and plunged again into tortuous streets,
where he strode over the cobblestone pavements, stopping now and
then to peer through the window of a shop at the light in the rear
where a group of people sat quietly about a table under a light,
or into a bar where a tired little boy with heavy eyelids and
sleeves rolled up from thin grey arms was washing glasses, or an
old woman, a shapeless bundle of black clothes, was swabbing the
floor. From doorways he heard talking and soft laughs. Upper
windows sent yellow rays of light across the fog.

In one doorway the vague light from a lamp bracketed in the wall
showed two figures, pressed into one by their close embrace. As
Andrews walked past, his heavy army boots clattering loud on the
wet pavement, they lifted their heads slowly. The boy had violet
eyes and pale beardless cheeks; the girl was bareheaded and kept
her brown eyes fixed on the boy's face. Andrews's heart thumped
within him. At last he had found them. He made a step towards
them, and then strode on losing himself fast in the cool effacing
fog. Again he had been mistaken. The fog swirled about him, hiding
wistful friendly faces, hands ready to meet his hands, eyes ready
to take fire with his glance, lips cold with the mist, to be
crushed under his lips. "From the girl at the singing under her
street-lamp..."

And he walked on alone through the drifting fog.



                              IV

Andrews left the station reluctantly, shivering in the raw grey
mist under which the houses of the village street and the rows of
motor trucks and the few figures of French soldiers swathed in
long formless coats, showed as vague dark blurs in the confused
dawnlight. His body felt flushed and sticky from a night spent
huddled in the warm fetid air of an overcrowded compartment. He
yawned and stretched himself and stood irresolutely in the middle
of the street with his pack biting into his shoulders. Out of
sight, behind the dark mass, in which a few ruddy lights glowed,
of the station buildings, the engine whistled and the train
clanked off into the distance. Andrews listened to its faint
reverberation through the mist with a sick feeling of despair. It
was the train that had brought him from Paris back to his
division.

As he stood shivering in the grey mist he remembered the curious
despairing reluctance he used to suffer when he went back to
boarding school after a holiday. How he used to go from the
station to the school by the longest road possible, taking frantic
account of every moment of liberty left him. Today his feet had
the same leaden reluctance as when they used to all but refuse to
take him up the long sandy hill to the school.

He wandered aimlessly for a while about the silent village hoping
to find a cafe where he could sit for a few minutes to take a last
look at himself before plunging again into the grovelling
promiscuity of the army. Not a light showed. All the shutters of
the shabby little brick and plaster houses were closed. With dull
springless steps he walked down the road they had pointed out to
him from the R. T. O.

Overhead the sky was brightening giving the mist that clung to the
earth in every direction ruddy billowing outlines. The frozen road
gave out a faint hard resonance under his footsteps. Occasionally
the silhouette of a tree by the roadside loomed up in the mist
ahead, its uppermost branches clear and ruddy with sunlight.

Andrews was telling himself that the war was over, and that in a
few months he would be free in any case. What did a few months
more or less matter? But the same thoughts were swept recklessly
away in the blind panic that was like a stampede of wild steers
within him. There was no arguing. His spirit was contorted with
revolt so that his flesh twitched and dark splotches danced before
his eyes. He wondered vaguely whether he had gone mad. Enormous
plans kept rising up out of the tumult of his mind and dissolving
suddenly like smoke in a high wind. He would run away and if they
caught him, kill himself. He would start a mutiny in his company,
he would lash all these men to frenzy by his words, so that they
too should refuse to form into Guns, so that they should laugh
when the officers got red in the face shouting orders at them, so
that the whole division should march off over the frosty hills,
without arms, without flags, calling all the men of all the armies
to join them, to march on singing, to laugh the nightmare out of
their blood. Would not some lightning flash of vision sear
people's consciousness into life again? What was the good of
stopping the war if the armies continued?

But that was just rhetoric. His mind was flooding itself with
rhetoric that it might keep its sanity. His mind was squeezing out
rhetoric like a sponge that he might not see dry madness face to
face.

And all the while his hard footsteps along the frozen road beat in
his ears bringing him nearer to the village where the division was
quartered. He was climbing a long hill. The mist thinned about him
and became brilliant with sunlight. Then he was walking in the
full sun over the crest of a hill with pale blue sky above his
head. Behind him and before him were mist-filled valleys and
beyond other ranges of long hills, with reddish-violet patches of
woodland, glowing faintly in the sunlight. In the valley at his
feet he could see, in the shadow of the hill he stood on, a church
tower and a few roofs rising out of the mist, as out of water.

Among the houses bugles were blowing mess-call.

The jauntiness of the brassy notes ringing up through the silence
was agony to him. How long the day would be. He looked at his
watch. It was seven thirty. How did they come to be having mess so
late?

The mist seemed doubly cold and dark when he was buried in it
again after his moment of sunlight. The sweat was chilled on his
face and streaks of cold went through his clothes, soaked from the
effort of carrying the pack. In the village street Andrews met a
man he did not know and asked him where the office was. The man,
who was chewing something, pointed silently to a house with green
shutters on the opposite side of the street.

At a desk sat Chrisfield smoking a cigarette. When he jumped up
Andrews noticed that he had a corporal's two stripes on his arm.

"Hello, Andy."

They shook hands warmly.

"A' you all right now, ole boy?"

"Sure, I'm fine," said Andrews. A sudden constraint fell upon
them.

"That's good," said Chrisfield.

"You're a corporal now. Congratulations."

"Um hum. Made me more'n a month ago."

They were silent. Chrisfield sat down in his chair again.

"What sort of a town is this?"

"It's a hell-hole, this dump is, a hell-hole."

"That's nice."

"Goin' to move soon, tell me.... Army o' Occupation. But Ah hadn't
ought to have told you that.... Don't tell any of the fellers."

"Where's the outfit quartered?"

"Ye won't know it; we've got fifteen new men. No account all of
'em. Second draft men."

"Civilians in the town?"

"You bet.... Come with me, Andy, an Ah'll tell 'em to give you
some grub at the cookshack. No...wait a minute an' you'll miss the
hike.... Hikes every day since the goddam armistice. They sent out
a general order telling 'em to double up on the drill."

They heard a voice shouting orders outside and the narrow street
filled up suddenly with a sound of boots beating the ground in
unison. Andrews kept his back to the window. Something in his legs
seemed to be tramping in time with the other legs.

"There they go," said Chrisfield. "Loot's with 'em today.... Want
some grub? If it ain't been punk since the armistice."



The "Y" hut was empty and dark; through the grimy windowpanes
could be seen fields and a leaden sky full of heavy ocherous
light, in which the leafless trees and the fields full of stubble
were different shades of dead, greyish brown. Andrews sat at the
piano without playing. He was thinking how once he had thought to
express all the cramped boredom of this life; the thwarted limbs
regimented together, lashed into straight lines, the monotony of
servitude. Unconsciously as he thought of it, the fingers of one
hand sought a chord, which jangled in the badly-tuned piano. "God,
how silly!" he muttered aloud, pulling his hands away. Suddenly he
began to play snatches of things he knew, distorting them,
willfully mutilating the rhythm, mixing into them snatches of
ragtime. The piano jangled under his hands, filling the empty hut
with clamor. He stopped suddenly, letting his fingers slide from
bass to treble, and began to play in earnest.

There was a cough behind him that had an artificial, discreet ring
to it. He went on playing without turning round. Then a voice
said:

"Beautiful, beautiful."

Andrews turned to find himself staring into a face of vaguely
triangular shape with a wide forehead and prominent eyelids over
protruding brown eyes. The man wore a Y. M. C. A. uniform which
was very tight for him, so that there were creases running from
each button across the front of his tunic.

"Oh, do go on playing. It's years since I heard any Debussy."

"It wasn't Debussy."

"Oh, wasn't it? Anyway it was just lovely. Do go on. I'll just
stand here and listen."

Andrews went on playing for a moment, made a mistake, started
over, made the same mistake, banged on the keys with his fist and
turned round again.

"I can't play," he said peevishly.

"Oh, you can, my boy, you can.... Where did you learn? I would
give a million dollars to play like that, if I had it."

Andrews glared at him silently.

"You are one of the men just back from hospital, I presume."

"Yes, worse luck."

"Oh, I don't blame you. These French towns are the dullest places;
though I just love France, don't you?" The "Y" man had a faintly
whining voice.

"Anywhere's dull in the army."

"Look, we must get to know each other real well. My name's Spencer
Sheffield...Spencer B. Sheffield.... And between you and me
there's not a soul in the division you can talk to. It's dreadful
not to have intellectual people about one. I suppose you're from
New York."

Andrews nodded.

"Um hum, so am I. You're probably read some of my things in Vain
Endeavor.... What, you've never read Vain Endeavor? I guess you
didn't go round with the intellectual set.... Musical people often
don't.... Of course I don't mean the Village. All anarchists and
society women there...."

"I've never gone round with any set, and I never..."

"Never mind, we'll fix that when we all get back to New York. And
now you just sit down at that piano and play me Debussy's
'Arabesque.'... I know you love it just as much as I do. But first
what's your name?"

"Andrews."

"Folks come from Virginia?"

"Yes." Andrews got to his feet.

"Then you're related to the Penneltons."

"I may be related to the Kaiser for all I know."

"The Penneltons...that's it. You see my mother was a Miss Spencer
from Spencer Falls, Virginia, and her mother was a Miss Pennelton,
so you and I are cousins. Now isn't that a coincidence?"

"Distant cousins. But I must go back to the barracks."

"Come in and see me any time," Spencer B. Sheffield shouted after
him. "You know where; back of the shack; And knock twice so I'll
know it's you."

Outside the house where he was quartered Andrews met the new top
sergeant, a lean man with spectacles and a little mustache of the
color and texture of a scrubbing brush.

"Here's a letter for you," the top sergeant said. "Better look at
the new K. P. list I've just posted."

The letter was from Henslowe. Andrews read it with a smile of
pleasure in the faint afternoon light, remembering Henslowe's
constant drawling talk about distant places he had never been to,
and the man who had eaten glass, and the day and a half in Paris.

"Andy," the letter began, "I've got the dope at last. Courses
begin in Paris February fifteenth. Apply at once to your C. O. to
study somethin' at University of Paris. Any amount of lies will
go. Apply all pull possible via sergeants, lieutenants and their
mistresses and laundresses. Yours, Henslowe."

His heart thumping, Andrews ran after the sergeant, passing, in
his excitement, a lieutenant without saluting him.

"Look here," snarled the lieutenant.

Andrews saluted, and stood stiffly at attention.

"Why didn't you salute me?"

"I was in a hurry, sir, and didn't see you. I was going on very
urgent company business, sir."

"Remember that just because the armistice is signed you needn't
think you're out of the army; at ease."

Andrews saluted. The lieutenant saluted, turned swiftly on his
heel and walked away.

Andrews caught up to the sergeant.

"Sergeant Coffin. Can I speak to you a minute?"

"I'm in a hell of a hurry."

"Have you heard anything about this army students' corps to send
men to universities here in France? Something the Y. M. C. A.'s
getting up."

"Can't be for enlisted men. No I ain't heard a word about it.
D'you want to go to school again?"

"If I get a chance. To finish my course."

"College man, are ye? So am I. Well, I'll let you know if I get
any general order about it. Can't do anything without getting a
general order about it. Looks to me like it's all bushwa."

"I guess you're right."

The street was grey dark. Stung by a sense of impotence, surging
with despairing rebelliousness, Andrews hurried back towards the
buildings where the company was quartered. He would be late for
mess. The grey street was deserted. From a window here and there
ruddy light streamed out to make a glowing oblong on the wall of a
house opposite.



"Goddam it, if ye don't believe me, you go ask the lootenant....
Look here, Toby, didn't our outfit see hotter work than any goddam
engineers?"

Toby had just stepped into the cafe, a tall man with a brown
bulldog face and a scar on his left cheek. He spoke rarely and
solemnly with a Maine coast Yankee twang.

"I reckon so," was all he said. He sat down on the bench beside
the other man who went on bitterly:

"I guess you would reckon so.... Hell, man, you ditch diggers
ain't in it."

"Ditch diggers!" The engineer banged his fist down on the table.
His lean pickled face was a furious red. "I guess we don't dig
half so many ditches as the infantry does...an' when we've dug
'em we don't crawl into 'em an' stay there like goddam
cottontailed jackrabbits."

"You guys don't git near enough to the front...."

"Like goddam cottontailed jackrabbits," shouted the pickle-faced
engineer again, roaring with laughter. "Ain't that so?" He looked
round the room for approval. The benches at the two long tables
were filled with infantry men who looked at him angrily. Noticing
suddenly that he had no support, he moderated his voice.

"The infantry's damn necessary, I'll admit that; but where'd you
fellers be without us guys to string the barbed wire for you?"

"There warn't no barbed wire strung in the Oregon forest where we
was, boy. What d'ye want barbed wire when you're advancin' for?"

"Look here...I'll bet you a bottle of cognac my company had more
losses than yourn did."

"Tek him up, Joe," said Toby, suddenly showing an interest in the
conversation.

"All right, it's a go."

"We had fifteen killed and twenty wounded," announced the engineer
triumphantly.

"How badly wounded?"

"What's that to you? Hand over the cognac?"

"Like hell. We had fifteen killed and twenty wounded too, didn't
we, Toby?"

"I reckon you're right," said Toby.

"Ain't I right?" asked the other man, addressing the company
generally.

"Sure, goddam right," muttered voices.

"Well, I guess it's all off, then," said the engineer.

"No, it ain't," said Toby, "reckon up yer wounded. The feller
who's got the worst wounded gets the cognac. Ain't that fair?"

"Sure."

"We've had seven fellers sent home already," said the engineer.

"We've had eight. Ain't we?"

"Sure," growled everybody in the room.

"How bad was they?"

"Two of 'em was blind," said Toby.

"Hell," said the engineer, jumping to his feet as if taking a
trick at poker. "We had a guy who was sent home without arms nor
legs, and three fellers got t.b. from bein' gassed."

John Andrews had been sitting in a corner of the room. He got up.
Something had made him think of the man he had known in the
hospital who had said that was the life to make a feller feel fit.
Getting up at three o'clock in the morning, you jumped out of bed
just like a cat.... He remembered how the olive-drab trousers had
dangled, empty from the man's chair.

"That's nothing; one of our sergeants had to have a new nose
grafted on...."

The village street was dark and deeply rutted with mud. Andrews
wandered up and down aimlessly. There was only one other cafe.
That would be just like this one. He couldn't go back to the
desolate barn where he slept. It would be too early to go to
sleep. A cold wind blew down the street and the sky was full of
vague movement of dark clouds. The partly-frozen mud clotted about
his feet as he walked along; he could feel the water penetrating
his shoes. Opposite the Y. M. C. A. hut at the end of the street
he stopped. After a moment's indecision he gave a little laugh,
and walked round to the back where the door of the "Y" man's room
was.

He knocked twice, half hoping there would be no reply.

Sheffield's whining high-pitched voice said: "Who is it?"

"Andrews."

"Come right in.... You're just the man I wanted to see." Andrews
stood with his hand on the knob.

"Do sit down and make yourself right at home."

Spencer Sheffield was sitting at a little desk in a room with
walls of unplaned boards and one small window. Behind the desk
were piles of cracker boxes and cardboard cases of cigarettes and
in the midst of them a little opening, like that of a railway
ticket office, in the wall through which the "Y" man sold his
commodities to the long lines of men who would stand for hours
waiting meekly in the room beyond.

Andrews was looking round for a chair.

"Oh, I just forgot. I'm sitting in the only chair," said Spencer
Sheffield, laughing, twisting his small mouth into a shape like a
camel's mouth and rolling about his large protruding eyes.

"Oh, that's all right. What I wanted to ask you was: do you know
anything about...?"

"Look, do come with me to my room," interrupted Sheffield. "I've
got such a nice sitting-room with an open fire, just next to
Lieutenant Bleezer.... An' there we'll talk...about everything.
I'm just dying to talk to somebody about the things of the
spirit."

"Do you know anything about a scheme for sending enlisted men to
French universities? Men who have not finished their courses."

"Oh, wouldn't that be just fine. I tell you, boy, there's nothing
like the U. S. government to think of things like that."

"But have you heard anything about it?"

"No; but I surely shall.... D'you mind switching the light off?...
That's it. Now just follow me. Oh, I do need a rest. I've been
working dreadfully hard since that Knights of Columbus man came
down here. Isn't it hateful the way they try to run down the
'Y'?... Now we can have a nice long talk. You must tell me all
about yourself."

"But don't you really know anything about that university scheme?
They say it begins February fifteenth," Andrews said in a low
voice.

"I'll ask Lieutenant Bleezer if he knows anything about it," said
Sheffield soothingly, throwing an arm around Andrews's shoulder
and pushing him in the door ahead of him.

They went through a dark hall to a little room where a fire burned
brilliantly in the hearth, lighting up with tongues of red and
yellow a square black walnut table and two heavy armchairs with
leather backs and bottoms that shone like lacquer.

"This is wonderful," said Andrews involuntarily.

"Romantic I call it. Makes you think of Dickens, doesn't it, and
Locksley Hall."

"Yes," said Andrews vaguely.

"Have you been in France long?" asked Andrews settling himself in
one of the chairs and looking into the dancing flames of the log
fire. "Will you smoke?" He handed Sheffield a crumpled cigarette.

"No, thanks, I only smoke special kinds. I have a weak heart.
That's why I was rejected from the army.... Oh, but I think it was
superb of you to join as a private; It was my dream to do that, to
be one of the nameless marching throng."

"I think it was damn foolish, not to say criminal," said Andrews
sullenly, still staring into the fire.

"You can't mean that. Or do you mean that you think you had
abilities which would have been worth more to your country in
another position?... I have many friends who felt that."

"No.... I don't think it's right of a man to go back on
himself.... I don't think butchering people ever does any good
...I have acted as if I did think it did good...out of
carelessness or cowardice, one or the other; that I think bad."

"You mustn't talk that way" said Sheffield hurriedly. "So you are
a musician, are you?" He asked the question with a jaunty
confidential air.

"I used to play the piano a little, if that's what you mean," said
Andrews.

"Music has never been the art I had most interest in. But many
things have moved me intensely.... Debussy and those beautiful
little things of Nevin's. You must know them.... Poetry has been
more my field. When I was young, younger than you are, quite a
lad...Oh, if we could only stay young; I am thirty-two."

"I don't see that youth by itself is worth much. It's the most
superb medium there is, though, for other things," said Andrews.
"Well, I must go," he said. "If you do hear anything about that
university scheme, you will let me know, won't you?"

"Indeed I shall, dear boy, indeed I shall."

They shook hands in jerky dramatic fashion and Andrews stumbled
down the dark hall to the door. When he stood out in the raw night
air again he drew a deep breath. By the light that streamed out
from a window he looked at his watch. There was time to go to the
regimental sergeant-major's office before tattoo.

At the opposite end of the village street from the Y. M. C. A. hut
was a cube-shaped house set a little apart from the rest in the
middle of a broad lawn which the constant crossing and recrossing
of a staff of cars and trains of motor trucks had turned into a
muddy morass in which the wheel tracks crisscrossed in every
direction. A narrow board walk led from the main road to the door.
In the middle of this walk Andrews met a captain and automatically
got off into the mud and saluted.

The regimental office was a large room that had once been
decorated by wan and ill-drawn mural paintings in the manner of
Puvis de Chavannes, but the walls had been so chipped and soiled
by five years of military occupation that they were barely
recognisable. Only a few bits of bare flesh and floating drapery
showed here and there above the maps and notices that were tacked
on the walls. At the end of the room a group of nymphs in Nile
green and pastel blue could be seen emerging from under a French
War Loan poster. The ceiling was adorned with an oval of flowers
and little plaster cupids in low relief which had also suffered
and in places showed the laths. The office was nearly empty. The
littered desks and silent typewriters gave a strange air of
desolation to the gutted drawing-room. Andrews walked boldly to
the furthest desk, where a little red card leaning against the
typewriter said "Regimental Sergeant-Major."

Behind the desk, crouched over a heap of typewritten reports, sat
a little man with scanty sandy hair, who screwed up his eyes and
smiled when Andrews approached the desk.

"Well, did you fix it up for me?" he asked.

"Fix what?" said Andrews.

"Oh, I thought you were someone else." The smile left the
regimental sergeant-major's thin lips. "What do you want?"

"Why, Regimental Sergeant-Major, can you tell me anything about a
scheme to send enlisted men to colleges over here? Can you tell me
who to apply to?"

"According to what general orders? And who told you to come and
see me about it, anyway?"

"Have you heard anything about it?"

"No, nothing definite. I'm busy now anyway. Ask one of your own
non-coms to find out about it." He crouched once more over the
papers.

Andrews was walking towards the door, flushing with annoyance,
when he saw that the man at the desk by the window was jerking his
head in a peculiar manner, just in the direction of the regimental
sergeant-major and then towards the door. Andrews smiled at him
and nodded. Outside the door, where an orderly sat on a short
bench reading a torn Saturday Evening Post, Andrews waited. The
hall was part of what must have been a ballroom, for it had a
much-scarred hardwood floor and big spaces of bare plaster framed
by gilt-and lavender-colored mouldings, which had probably held
tapestries. The partition of unplaned boards that formed other
offices cut off the major part of a highly decorated ceiling where
cupids with crimson-daubed bottoms swam in all attitudes in a sea
of pink-and blue-and lavender-colored clouds, wreathing themselves
coyly in heavy garlands of waxy hothouse flowers, while
cornucopias spilling out squashy fruits gave Andrews a feeling of
distinct insecurity as he looked up from below.

"Say are you a Kappa Mu?"

Andrews looked down suddenly and saw in front of him the man who
had signalled to him in the regimental sergeant-major's office.

"Are you a Kappa Mu?" he asked again.

"No, not that I know of," stammered Andrews puzzled.

"What school did you go to?"

"Harvard."

"Harvard.... Guess we haven't got a chapter there.... I'm from
North Western. Anyway you want to go to school in France here if
you can. So do I."

"Don't you want to come and have a drink?"

The man frowned, pulled his overseas cap down over his forehead,
where the hair grew very low, and looked about him mysteriously.
"Yes," he said.

They splashed together down the muddy village street. "We've got
thirteen minutes before tattoo.... My name's Walters, what's
yours?" He spoke in a low voice in short staccato phrases.

"Andrews."

"Andrews, you've got to keep this dark. If everybody finds out
about it we're through. It's a shame you're not a Kappa Mu, but
college men have got to stick together, that's the way I look at
it."

"Oh, I'll keep it dark enough," said Andrews.

"It's too good to be true. The general order isn't out yet, but
I've seen a preliminary circular. What school d'you want to go
to?"

"Sorbonne, Paris."

"That's the stuff. D'you know the back room at Baboon's?"

Walters turned suddenly to the left up an alley, and broke through
a hole in a hawthorn hedge.

"A guy's got to keep his eyes and ears open if he wants to get
anywhere in this army," he said.

As they ducked in the back door of a cottage, Andrews caught a
glimpse of the billowy line of a tile roof against the lighter
darkness of the sky. They sat down on a bench built into a chimney
where a few sticks made a splutter of flames.

"Monsieur desire?" A red-faced girl with a baby in her arms came
up to them.

"That's Babette; Baboon I call her," said Walters with a laugh.

"Chocolat," said Walters.

"That'll suit me all right. It's my treat, remember."

"I'm not forgetting it. Now let's get to business. What you do is
this. You write an application. I'll make that out for you on the
typewriter tomorrow and you meet me here at eight tomorrow night
and I'll give it to you.... You sign it at once and hand it in to
your sergeant. See?"

"This'll just be a preliminary application; when the order's out
you'll have to make another."

The woman, this time without the baby, appeared out of the
darkness of the room with a candle and two cracked bowls from
which steam rose, faint primrose-color in the candle light.
Walters drank his bowl down at a gulp, grunted and went on
talking.

"Give me a cigarette, will you?... You'll have to make it out darn
soon too, because once the order's out every son of a gun in the
division'll be making out to be a college man. How did you get
your tip?"

"From a fellow in Paris."

"You've been to Paris, have you?" said Walters admiringly. "Is it
the way they say it is? Gee, these French are immoral. Look at
this woman here. She'll sleep with a feller soon as not. Got a
baby too!"

"But who do the applications go in to?"

"To the colonel, or whoever he appoints to handle it. You a
Catholic?"

"No."

"Neither am I. That's the hell of it. The regimental sergeant-
major is."

"Well?"

"I guess you haven't noticed the way things run up at divisional
headquarters. It's a regular cathedral. Isn't a mason in it....
But I must beat it.... Better pretend you don't know me if you
meet me on the street; see?"

"All right."

Walters hurried out of the door. Andrews sat alone looking at the
flutter of little flames about the pile of sticks on the hearth,
while he sipped chocolate from the warm bowl held between the
palms of both hands.

He remembered a speech out of some very bad romantic play he had
heard when he was very small.

"About your head I fling...the curse of Ro-me."

He started to laugh, sliding back and forth on the smooth bench
which had been polished by the breeches of generations warming
their feet at the fire. The red-faced woman stood with her hands
on her hips looking at him in astonishment, while he laughed and
laughed.

"Mais quelle gaite, quelle gaite," she kept saying.



The straw under him rustled faintly with every sleepy movement
Andrews made in his blankets. In a minute the bugle was going to
blow and he was going to jump out of his blankets, throw on his
clothes and fall into line for roll call in the black mud of the
village street. It couldn't be that only a month had gone by since
he had got back from hospital. No, he had spent a lifetime in this
village being dragged out of his warm blankets every morning by
the bugle, shivering as he stood in line for roll call, shuffling
in a line that moved slowly past the cookshack, shuffling along in
another line to throw what was left of his food into garbage cans,
to wash his mess kit in the greasy water a hundred other men had
washed their mess kits in; lining up to drill, to march on along
muddy roads, splattered by the endless trains of motor trucks;
lining up twice more for mess, and at last being forced by another
bugle into his blankets again to sleep heavily while a smell hung
in his nostrils of sweating woolen clothing and breathed-out air
and dusty blankets. In a minute the bugle was going to blow, to
snatch him out of even these miserable thoughts, and throw him
into an automaton under other men's orders. Childish spiteful
desires surged into his mind. If the bugler would only die. He
could picture him, a little man with a broad face and putty-
colored cheeks, a small rusty mustache and bow-legs lying like a
calf on a marble slab in a butcher's shop on top of his blankets.
What nonsense! There were other buglers. He wondered how many
buglers there were in the army. He could picture them all, in
dirty little villages, in stone barracks, in towns, in great camps
that served the country for miles with rows of black warehouses
and narrow barrack buildings standing with their feet a little
apart; giving their little brass bugles a preliminary tap before
putting out their cheeks and blowing in them and stealing a
million and a half (or was it two million or three million) lives,
and throwing the warm sentient bodies into coarse automatons who
must be kept busy, lest they grow restive, till killing time began
again.

The bugle blew with the last jaunty notes, a stir went through the
barn.

Corporal Chrisfield stood on the ladder that led up from the yard,
his head on a level with the floor shouting:

"Shake it up, fellers! If a guy's late to roll call, it's K. P. for
a week."

As Andrews, while buttoning his tunic, passed him on the ladder,
he whispered:

"Tell me we're going to see service again, Andy... Army o'
Occupation."

While he stood stiffly at attention waiting to answer when the
sergeant called his name, Andrews's mind was whirling in crazy
circles of anxiety. What if they should leave before the General
Order came on the University plan? The application would certainly
be lost in the confusion of moving the Division, and he would be
condemned to keep up this life for more dreary weeks and months.
Would any years of work and happiness in some future existence
make up for the humiliating agony of this servitude?

"Dismissed!"

He ran up the ladder to fetch his mess kit and in a few minutes
was in line again in the rutted village street where the grey
houses were just forming outlines as light crept slowly into the
leaden sky, while a faint odor of bacon and coffee came to him,
making him eager for food, eager to drown his thoughts in the
heaviness of swiftly-eaten greasy food and in the warmth of watery
coffee gulped down out of a tin-curved cup. He was telling himself
desperately that he must do something--that he must make an effort
to save himself, that he must fight against the deadening routine
that numbed him.

Later, while he was sweeping the rough board floor of the
company's quarters, the theme came to him which had come to him
long ago, in a former incarnation it seemed, when he was smearing
windows with soap from a gritty sponge along the endless side of
the barracks in the training camp. Time and time again in the past
year he had thought of it, and dreamed of weaving it into a fabric
of sound which would express the trudging monotony of days bowed
under the yoke. "Under the Yoke"; that would be a title for it. He
imagined the sharp tap of the conductor's baton, the silence of a
crowded hall, the first notes rasping bitterly upon the tense ears
of men and women. But as he tried to concentrate his mind on the
music, other things intruded upon it, blurred it. He kept feeling
the rhythm of the Queen of Sheba slipping from the shoulders of
her gaudily caparisoned elephant, advancing towards him through
the torchlight, putting her hand, fantastic with rings and long
gilded fingernails, upon his shoulders so that ripples of delight,
at all the voluptuous images of his desire, went through his whole
body, making it quiver like a flame with yearning for unimaginable
things. It all muddled into fantastic gibberish--into sounds of
horns and trombones and double basses blown off key while a
piccolo shrilled the first bars of "The Star Spangled Banner."

He had stopped sweeping and looked about him dazedly. He was
alone. Outside, he heard a sharp voice call "Atten-shun!" He ran
down the ladder and fell in at the end of the line under the angry
glare of the lieutenant's small eyes, which were placed very close
together on either side of a lean nose, black and hard, like the
eyes of a crab.

The company marched off through the mud to the drill field.



After retreat Andrews knocked at the door at the back of the Y. M.
C. A., but as there was no reply, he strode off with a long,
determined stride to Sheffield's room.

In the moment that elapsed between his knock and an answer, he
could feel his heart thumping. A little sweat broke out on his
temples.

"Why, what's the matter, boy? You look all wrought up," said
Sheffield, holding the door half open, and blocking, with his lean
form, entrance to the room.

"May I come in? I want to talk to you," said Andrews.

"Oh, I suppose it'll be all right.... You see I have an officer
with me..." then there was a flutter in Sheffield's voice. "Oh, do
come in"; he went on, with sudden enthusiasm. "Lieutenant Bleezer
is fond of music too.... Lieutenant, this is the boy I was telling
you about. We must get him to play for us. If he had the
opportunities, I am sure he'd be a famous musician."

Lieutenant Bleezer was a dark youth with a hooked nose and pince-
nez. His tunic was unbuttoned and he held a cigar in his hand. He
smiled in an evident attempt to put this enlisted man at his ease.

"Yes, I am very fond of music, modern music," he said, leaning
against the mantelpiece. "Are you a musician by profession?"

"Not exactly...nearly." Andrews thrust his hands into the bottoms
of his trouser pockets and looked from one to the other with a
certain defiance.

"I suppose you've played in some orchestra? How is it you are not
in the regimental band?"

"No, except the Pierian."

"The Pierian? Were you at Harvard?"

Andrews nodded.

"So was I."

"Isn't that a coincidence?" said Sheffield. "I'm so glad I just
insisted on your coming in."

"What year were you?" asked Lieutenant Bleezer, with a faint
change of tone, drawing a finger along his scant black moustache.

"Fifteen."

"I haven't graduated yet," said the lieutenant with a laugh.

"What I wanted to ask you, Mr. Sheffield...."

"Oh, my boy; my boy, you know you've known me long enough to call
me Spence," broke in Sheffield.

"I want to know," went on Andrews speaking slowly, "can you help
me to get put on the list to be sent to the University of
Paris?... I know that a list has been made out, although the
General Order has not come yet. I am disliked by most of the non-
coms and I don't see how I can get on without somebody's help...I
simply can't go this life any longer." Andrews closed his lips
firmly and looked at the ground, his face flushing.

"Well, a man of your attainments certainly ought to go," said
Lieutenant Bleezer, with a faint tremor of hesitation in his
voice. "I'm going to Oxford myself."

"Trust me, my boy," said Sheffield. "I'll fix it up for you, I
promise. Let's shake hands on it." He seized Andrews's hand and
pressed it warmly in a moist palm. "If it's within human power,
within human power," he added.

"Well, I must go," said Lieutenant Bleezer, suddenly striding to
the door. "I promised the Marquise I'd drop in. Good-bye.... Take
a cigar, won't you?" He held out three cigars in the direction of
Andrews.

"No, thank you."

"Oh, don't you think the old aristocracy of France is just too
wonderful? Lieutenant Bleezer goes almost every evening to call on
the Marquise de Rompemouville. He says she is just too spirituelle
for words.... He often meets the Commanding Officer there."

Andrews had dropped into a chair and sat with his face buried in
his hands, looking through his fingers at the fire, where a few
white fingers of flame were clutching intermittently at a grey
beech log. His mind was searching desperately for expedients.

He got to his feet and shouted shrilly:

"I can't go this life any more, do you hear that? No possible
future is worth all this. If I can get to Paris, all right. If
not, I'll desert and damn the consequences."

"But I've already promised I'll do all I can...."

"Well, do it now," interrupted Andrews brutally.

"All right, I'll go and see the colonel and tell him what a great
musician you are."

"Let's go together, now."

"But that'll look queer, dear boy."

"I don't give a damn, come along.... You can talk to him. You seem
to be thick with all the officers."

"You must wait till I tidy up," said Sheffield.

"All right."

Andrews strode up and down in the mud in front of the house,
snapping his fingers with impatience, until Sheffield came out,
then they walked off in silence.

"Now wait outside a minute," whispered Sheffield when they came to
the white house with bare grapevines over the front, where the
colonel lived.

After a wait, Andrews found himself at the door of a brilliantly-
lighted drawing room. There was a dense smell of cigar smoke. The
colonel, an elderly man with a benevolent beard, stood before him
with a coffee cup in his hand. Andrews saluted punctiliously.

"They tell me you are quite a pianist.... Sorry I didn't know it
before," said the colonel in a kindly tone. "You want to go to
Paris to study under this new scheme?"

"Yes, sir."

"What a shame I didn't know before. The list of the men going is
all made out.... Of course perhaps at the last minute...if
somebody else doesn't go...your name can go in."

The colonel smiled graciously and turned back into the room.

"Thank you, Colonel," said Andrews, saluting.

Without a word to Sheffield, he strode off down the dark village
street towards his quarters.



Andrews stood on the broad village street, where the mud was
nearly dry, and a wind streaked with warmth ruffled the few
puddles; he was looking into the window of the cafe to see if
there was anyone he knew inside from whom he could borrow money
for a drink. It was two months since he had had any pay, and his
pockets were empty. The sun had just set on a premature spring
afternoon, flooding the sky and the grey houses and the
tumultuous tiled roofs with warm violet light. The faint
premonition of the stirring of life in the cold earth, that came
to Andrews with every breath he drew of the sparkling wind, stung
his dull boredom to fury. It was the first of March, he was
telling himself over and over again. The fifteenth of February, he
had expected to be in Paris, free, or half-free; at least able to
work. It was the first of March and here he was still helpless,
still tied to the monotonous wheel of routine, incapable of any
real effort, spending his spare time wandering like a lost dog up
and down this muddy street, from the Y. M. C. A. hut at one end of
the village to the church and the fountain in the middle, and to
the Divisional Headquarters at the other end, then back again,
looking listlessly into windows, staring in people's faces without
seeing them. He had given up all hope of being sent to Paris. He
had given up thinking about it or about anything; the same dull
irritation of despair droned constantly in his head, grinding
round and round like a broken phonograph record.

After looking a long while in the window of the cafe of the Braves
Allies, he walked a little down the street and stood in the same
position staring into the Repos du Poilu, where a large sign
"American spoken" blocked up half the window. Two officers passed.
His hand snapped up to the salute automatically, like a mechanical
signal. It was nearly dark. After a while he began to feel serious
coolness in the wind, shivered and started to wander aimlessly
down the street.

He recognised Walters coming towards him and was going to pass him
without speaking when Walters bumped into him, muttered in his ear
"Come to Baboon's," and hurried off with his swift business-like
stride. Andrews, stood irresolutely for a while with his head
bent, then went with unresilient steps up the alley, through the
hole in the hedge and into Babette's kitchen. There was no fire.
He stared morosely at the grey ashes until he heard Walters's
voice beside him:

"I've got you all fixed up."

"What do you mean?"

"Mean...are you asleep, Andrews? They've cut a name off the school
list, that's all. Now if you shake a leg and somebody doesn't get
in ahead of you, you'll be in Paris before you know it."

"That's damn decent of you to come and tell me."

"Here's your application," said Walters, drawing a paper out of
his pocket. "Take it to the colonel; get him to O. K. it and then
rush it up to the sergeant-major's office yourself. They are
making out travel orders now. So long."

Walters had vanished. Andrews was alone again, staring at the grey
ashes. Suddenly he jumped to his feet and hurried off towards
headquarters. In the anteroom to the colonel's office he waited a
long while, looking at his boots that were thickly coated with
mud. "Those boots will make a bad impression; those boots will
make a bad impression," a voice was saying over and over again
inside of him. A lieutenant was also waiting to see the colonel, a
young man with pink cheeks and a milky-white forehead, who held
his hat in one hand with a pair of khaki-colored kid gloves, and
kept passing a hand over his light well-brushed hair. Andrews felt
dirty and ill-smelling in his badly-fitting uniform. The sight of
this perfect young man in his whipcord breeches, with his
manicured nails and immaculately polished puttees exasperated him.
He would have liked to fight him, to prove that he was the better
man, to outwit him, to make him forget his rank and his important
air.... The lieutenant had gone in to see the colonel. Andrews
found himself reading a chart of some sort tacked up on the wall.
There were names and dates and figures, but he could not make out
what it was about.

"All right! Go ahead," whispered the orderly to him; and he was
standing with his cap in his hand before the colonel who was
looking at him severely, fingering the papers he had on the desk
with a heavily veined hand.

Andrews saluted. The colonel made an impatient gesture.

"May I speak to you, Colonel, about the school scheme?"

"I suppose you've got permission from somebody to come to me."

"No, sir." Andrews's mind was struggling to find something to say.

"Well, you'd better go and get it."

"But, Colonel, there isn't time; the travel orders are being made
out at this minute. I've heard that there's been a name crossed
out on the list."

"Too late."

"But, Colonel, you don't know how important it is. I am a musician
by trade; if I can't get into practice again before being
demobilized, I shan't be able to get a job.... I have a mother and
an old aunt dependent on me. My family has seen better days, you
see, sir. It's only by being high up in my profession that I can
earn enough to give them what they are accustomed to. And a man in
your position in the world, Colonel, must know what even a few
months of study in Paris mean to a pianist."

The colonel smiled.

"Let's see your application," he said.

Andrews handed it to him with a trembling hand. The colonel made a
few marks on one corner with a pencil.

"Now if you can get that to the sergeant-major in time to have
your name included in the orders, well and good."

Andrews saluted, and hurried out. A sudden feeling of nausea had
come over him. He was hardly able to control a mad desire to tear
the paper up. "The sons of bitches...the sons of bitches," he
muttered to himself. Still he ran all the way to the square,
isolated building where the regimental office was.

He stopped panting in front of the desk that bore the little red
card, Regimental Sergeant-Major. The regimental sergeant-major
looked up at him enquiringly.

"Here's an application for School at the Sorbonne, Sergeant.
Colonel Wilkins told me to run up to you with it, said he was very
anxious to have it go in at once."

"Too late," said the regimental sergeant-major.

"But the colonel said it had to go in."

"Can't help it.... Too late," said the regimental sergeant-major.

Andrews felt the room and the men in their olive-drab shirt
sleeves at the typewriters and the three nymphs creeping from
behind the French War Loan poster whirl round his head. Suddenly
he heard a voice behind him:

"Is the name Andrews, John, Sarge?"

"How the hell should I know?" said the regimental sergeant-major.

"Because I've got it in the orders already.... I don't know how it
got in." The voice was Walters's voice, staccatto and business-
like.

"Well, then, why d'you want to bother me about it? Give me that
paper." The regimental sergeant-major jerked the paper out of
Andrews's hand and looked at it savagely.

"All right, you leave tomorrow. A copy of the orders'll go to your
company in the morning," growled the regimental sergeant-major.

Andrews looked hard at Walters as he went out, but got no glance
in return. When he stood in the air again, disgust surged up
within him, bitterer than before. The fury of his humiliation made
tears start in his eyes. He walked away from the village down the
main road, splashing carelessly through the puddles, slipping in
the wet clay of the ditches. Something within him, like the voice
of a wounded man swearing, was whining in his head long strings of
filthy names. After walking a long while he stopped suddenly with
his fists clenched. It was completely dark, the sky was faintly
marbled by a moon behind the clouds. On both sides of the road
rose the tall grey skeletons of poplars. When the sound of his
footsteps stopped, he heard a faint lisp of running water.
Standing still in the middle of the road, he felt his feelings
gradually relax. He said aloud in a low voice several times: "You
are a damn fool, John Andrews," and started walking slowly and
thoughtfully back to the village.



                              V

Andrews felt an arm put round his shoulder.

"Ah've been to hell an' gone lookin' for you, Andy," said
Chrisfield's voice in his ear, jerking him out of the reverie he
walked in. He could feel in his face Chrisfield's breath, heavy
with cognac.

"I'm going to Paris tomorrow, Chris," said Andrews.

"Ah know it, boy. Ah know it. That's why I was that right smart to
talk to you.... You doan want to go to Paris.... Why doan ye come
up to Germany with us? Tell me they live like kings up there."

"All right," said Andrews, "let's go to the back room at
Babette's."

Chrisfield hung on his shoulder, walking unsteadily beside him. At
the hole in the hedge Chrisfield stumbled and nearly pulled them
both down. They laughed, and still laughing staggered into the
dark kitchen, where they found the red-faced woman with her baby
sitting beside the fire with no other light than the flicker of
the rare flames that shot up from a little mass of wood embers.
The baby started crying shrilly when the two soldiers stamped in.
The woman got up and, talking automatically to the baby all the
while, went off to get a light and wine.

Andrews looked at Chrisfield's face by the firelight. His cheeks
had lost the faint childish roundness they had had when Andrews
had first talked to him, sweeping up cigarette butts off the walk
in front of the barracks at the training camp.

"Ah tell you, boy, you ought to come with us to Germany...
nauthin' but whores in Paris."

"The trouble is, Chris, that I don't want to live like a king, or
a sergeant or a major-general.... I want to live like John
Andrews."

"What yer goin' to do in Paris, Andy?"

"Study music."

"Ah guess some day Ah'll go into a movie show an' when they turn
on the lights, who'll Ah see but ma ole frien' Andy raggin' the
scales on the pyaner."

"Something like that.... How d'you like being a corporal, Chris?"

"O, Ah doan know." Chrisfield spat on the floor between his feet.
"It's funny, ain't it? You an' me was right smart friends onct....
Guess it's bein' a non-com."

Andrews did not answer.

Chrisfield sat silent with his eyes on the fire.

"Well, Ah got him.... Gawd, it was easy," he said suddenly.

"What do you mean?"

"Ah got him, that's all."0000

"You mean...?"

Chrisfield nodded.

"Um-hum, in the Oregon forest," he said.

Andrews said nothing. He felt suddenly very tired. He thought of
men he had seen in attitudes of death.

"Ah wouldn't ha' thought it had been so easy," said Chrisfield.

The woman came through the door at the end of the kitchen with a
candle in her hand. Chrisfield stopped speaking suddenly.

"Tomorrow I'm going to Paris," cried Andrews boisterously. "It's
the end of soldiering for me."

"Ah bet it'll be some sport in Germany, Andy.... Sarge says we'll
be goin' up to Coab...what's its name?"

"Coblenz."

Chrisfield poured a glass of wine out and drank it off,
smacking his lips after it and wiping his mouth on the back of his
hand.

"D'ye remember, Andy, we was both of us brushin' cigarette butts
at that bloody trainin' camp when we first met up with each
other?"

"Considerable water has run under the bridge since then."

"Ah reckon we won't meet up again, mos' likely."

"Hell, why not?"

They were silent again, staring at the fading embers of the fire.
In the dim edge of the candlelight the woman stood with her hands
on her hips, looking at them fixedly.

"Reckon a feller wouldn't know what to do with himself if he did
get out of the army...now, would he, Andy?"

"So long, Chris. I'm beating it," said Andrews in a harsh voice,
jumping to his feet.

"So long, Andy, ole man.... Ah'll pay for the drinks." Chrisfield
was beckoning with his hand to the red-faced woman, who advanced
slowly through the candlelight.

"Thanks, Chris."

Andrews strode away from the door. A cold, needle-like rain was
falling. He pulled up his coat collar and ran down the muddy
village street towards his quarters.




                              VI

In the opposite corner of the compartment Andrews could see
Walters hunched up in an attitude of sleep, with his cap pulled
down far over his eyes. His mouth was open, and his head wagged
with the jolting of the train. The shade over the light plunged
the compartment in dark-blue obscurity, which made the night sky
outside the window and the shapes of trees and houses, evolving
and pirouetting as they glided by, seem very near. Andrews felt no
desire to sleep; he had sat a long time leaning his head against
the frame of the window, looking out at the fleeing shadows and
the occasional little red-green lights that darted by and the glow
of the stations that flared for a moment and were lost in dark
silhouettes of unlighted houses and skeleton trees and black
hillsides. He was thinking how all the epochs in his life seemed
to have been marked out by railway rides at night. The jolting
rumble of the wheels made the blood go faster through his veins;
made him feel acutely the clattering of the train along the
gleaming rails, spurning fields and trees and houses, piling up
miles and miles between the past and future. The gusts of cold
night air when he opened the window and the faint whiffs of steam
and coal gas that tingled in his nostrils excited him like a smile
on a strange face seen for a moment in a crowded street. He did
not think of what he had left behind. He was straining his eyes
eagerly through the darkness towards the vivid life he was going
to live. Boredom and abasement were over. He was free to work and
hear music and make friends. He drew deep breaths; warm waves of
vigor seemed flowing constantly from his lungs and throat to his
finger tips and down through his body and the muscles of his legs.
He looked at his watch: "One." In six hours he would be in Paris.
For six hours he would sit there looking out at the fleeting
shadows of the countryside, feeling in his blood the eager throb
of the train, rejoicing in every mile the train carried him away
from things past.

Walters still slept, half slipping off the seat, with his mouth
open and his overcoat bundled round his head. Andrews looked out
of the window, feeling in his nostrils the tingle of steam and
coal gas. A phrase out of some translation of the Iliad came to
his head: "Ambrosial night, Night ambrosial unending." But better
than sitting round a camp fire drinking wine and water and
listening to the boastful yarns of long-haired Achaeans, was this
hustling through the countryside away from the monotonous whine of
past unhappiness, towards joyousness and life.

Andrews began to think of the men he had left behind. They were
asleep at this time of night, in barns and barracks, or else
standing on guard with cold damp feet, and cold hands which the
icy rifle barrel burned when they tended it. He might go far away
out of sound of the tramp of marching, away from the smell of
overcrowded barracks where men slept in rows like cattle, but he
would still be one of them. He would not see an officer pass him
without an unconscious movement of servility, he would not hear a
bugle without feeling sick with hatred. If he could only express
these thwarted lives, the miserable dullness of industrialized
slaughter, it might have been almost worth while--for him; for the
others, it would never be worth while. "But you're talking as if
you were out of the woods; you're a soldier still, John Andrews."
The words formed themselves in his mind as vividly as if he had
spoken them. He smiled bitterly and settled himself again to watch
silhouettes of trees and hedges and houses and hillsides fleeing
against the dark sky.

When he awoke the sky was grey. The train was moving slowly,
clattering loudly over switches, through a town of wet slate roofs
that rose in fantastic patterns of shadow above the blue mist.
Walters was smoking a cigarette.

"God! These French trains are rotten," he said when he noticed
that Andrews was awake. "The most inefficient country I ever was
in anyway."

"Inefficiency be damned," broke in Andrews, jumping up and
stretching himself. He opened the window. "The heating's too
damned efficient.... I think we're near Paris."

The cold air, with a flavor of mist in it, poured into the stuffy
compartment. Every breath was joy. Andrews felt a crazy buoyancy
bubbling up in him. The rumbling clatter of the train wheels sang
in his ears. He threw himself on his back on the dusty blue seat
and kicked his heels in the air like a colt.

"Liven up, for God's sake, man," he shouted. "We're getting near
Paris."

"We are lucky bastards," said Walters, grinning, with the
cigarette hanging out of the corner of his mouth. "I'm going to
see if I can find the rest of the gang."

Andrews, alone in the compartment, found himself singing at the
top of his lungs.

As the day brightened the mist lifted off the flat linden-green
fields intersected by rows of leafless poplars. Salmon-colored
houses with blue roofs wore already a faintly citified air. They
passed brick-kilns and clay-quarries, with reddish puddles of
water in the bottom of them; crossed a jade-green river where a
long file of canal boats with bright paint on their prows moved
slowly. The engine whistled shrilly. They clattered through a
small freight yard, and rows of suburban houses began to form, at
first chaotically in broad patches of garden-land, and then in
orderly ranks with streets between and shops at the corners. A
dark-grey dripping wall rose up suddenly and blotted out the view.
The train slowed down and went through several stations crowded
with people on their way to work,--ordinary people in varied
clothes with only here and there a blue or khaki uniform. Then
there was more dark-grey wall, and the obscurity of wide bridges
under which dusty oil lamps burned orange and red, making a gleam
on the wet wall above them, and where the wheels clanged loudly.
More freight yards and the train pulled slowly past other trains
full of faces and silhouettes of people, to stop with a jerk in a
station. And Andrews was standing on the grey cement platform,
sniffing smells of lumber and merchandise and steam. His ungainly
pack and blanket-roll he carried on his shoulder like a cross. He
had left his rifle and cartridge belt carefully tucked out of
sight under the seat.

Walters and five other men straggled along the platform towards
him, carrying or dragging their packs.

There was a look of apprehension on Walters's face.

"Well, what do we do now?" he said.

"Do!" cried Andrews, and he burst out laughing.



Prostrate bodies in olive drab hid the patch of tender green grass
by the roadside. The company was resting. Chrisfield sat on a
stump morosely whittling at a stick with a pocket knife. Judkins
was stretched out beside him.

"What the hell do they make us do this damn hikin' for, Corp?"

"Guess they're askeered we'll forgit how to walk."

"Well, ain't it better than loafin' around yer billets all day,
thinkin' an' cursin' an' wishin' ye was home?" spoke up the man who
sat the other side, pounding down the tobacco in his pipe with a
thick forefinger.

"It makes me sick, trampin' round this way in ranks all day with
the goddam frawgs starin' at us an'..."

"They're laughin' at us, I bet," broke in another voice.

"We'll be movin' soon to the Army o' Occupation," said Chrisfield
cheerfully. "In Germany it'll be a reglar picnic."

"An' d'you know what that means?" burst out Judkins, sitting bolt
upright. "D'you know how long the troops is goin' to stay in
Germany? Fifteen years."

"Gawd, they couldn't keep us there that long, man."

"They can do anythin' they goddam please with us. We're the guys
as is gettin' the raw end of this deal. It ain't the same with an'
edicated guy like Andrews or Sergeant Coffin or them. They can
suck around after 'Y' men, an' officers an' get on the inside
track, an' all we can do is stand up an' salute an' say 'Yes,
lootenant' an' 'No, lootenant' an' let 'em ride us all they goddam
please. Ain't that gospel truth, corporal?"

"Ah guess you're right, Judkie; we gits the raw end of the stick."

"That damn yellar dawg Andrews goes to Paris an' gets schoolin'
free an' all that."

"Hell, Andy waren't yellar, Judkins."

"Well, why did he go bellyachin' around all the time like he knew
more'n the lootenant did?"

"Ah reckon he did," said Chrisfield.

"Anyway, you can't say that those guys who went to Paris did a
goddam thing more'n any the rest of us did.... Gawd, I ain't even
had a leave yet."

"Well, it ain't no use crabbin'."

"No, onct we git home an' folks know the way we've been treated,
there'll be a great ole investigation. I can tell you that," said
one of the new men.

"It makes you mad, though, to have something like that put over on
ye.... Think of them guys in Paris, havin' a hell of a time with
wine an' women, an' we stay out here an' clean our guns an'
drill.... God, I'd like to get even with some of them guys."

The whistle blew. The patch of grass became unbroken green again
as the men lined up along the side of the road.

"Fall in!" called the Sergeant.

"Atten-shun!"

"Right dress!"

"Front! God, you guys haven't got no snap in yer.... Stick yer
belly in, you. You know better than to stand like that."

"Squads, right! March! Hep, hep, hep!"

The Company tramped off along the muddy road. Their steps were all
the same length. Their arms swung in the same rhythm. Their faces
were cowed into the same expression, their thoughts were the same.
The tramp, tramp of their steps died away along the road.

Birds were singing among the budding trees. The young grass by the
roadside kept the marks of the soldiers' bodies.




                   PART FIVE: THE WORLD OUTSIDE

                             I

Andrews, and six other men from his division, sat at a table
outside the cafe opposite the Gare de l'Est. He leaned back in his
chair with a cup of coffee lifted, looking across it at the stone
houses with many balconies. Steam, scented of milk and coffee,
rose from the cup as he sipped from it. His ears were full of a
rumble of traffic and a clacking of heels as people walked briskly
by along the damp pavements. For a while he did not hear what the
men he was sitting with were saying. They talked and laughed, but
he looked beyond their khaki uniforms and their boat-shaped caps
unconsciously. He was taken up with the smell of the coffee and of
the mist. A little rusty sunshine shone on the table of the cafe
and on the thin varnish of wet mud that covered the asphalt
pavement. Looking down the Avenue, away from the station, the
houses, dark grey tending to greenish in the shadow and to violet
in the sun, faded into a soft haze of distance. Dull gilt
lettering glittered along black balconies. In the foreground were
men and women walking briskly, their cheeks whipped a little into
color by the rawness of the morning. The sky was a faintly roseate
grey.

Walters was speaking:

"The first thing I want to see is the Eiffel Tower."

"Why d'you want to see that?" said the small sergeant with a black
mustache and rings round his eyes like a monkey.

"Why, man, don't you know that everything begins from the Eiffel
Tower? If it weren't for the Eiffel Tower, there wouldn't be any
sky-scrapers...."

"How about the Flatiron Building and Brooklyn Bridge? They were
built before the Eiffel Tower, weren't they?" interrupted the man
from New York.

"The Eiffel Tower's the first piece of complete girder
construction in the whole world," reiterated Walters dogmatically.

"First thing I'm going to do's go to the Folies Berd-jairs; me for
the w.w.'s."

"Better lay off the wild women, Bill," said Walters.

"I ain't goin' to look at a woman," said the sergeant with the
black mustache. "I guess I seen enough women in my time,
anyway.... The war's over, anyway."

"You just wait, kid, till you fasten your lamps on a real
Parizianne," said a burly, unshaven man with a corporal's stripes
on his arm, roaring with laughter.

Andrews lost track of the talk again, staring dreamily through
half-closed eyes down the long straight street, where greens and
violets and browns merged into a bluish grey monochrome at a
little distance. He wanted to be alone, to wander at random
through the city, to stare dreamily at people and things, to talk
by chance to men and women, to sink his life into the misty
sparkling life of the streets. The smell of the mist brought a
memory to his mind. For a long while he groped for it, until
suddenly he remembered his dinner with Henslowe and the faces of
the boy and girl he had talked to on the Butte. He must find
Henslowe at once. A second's fierce resentment went through him
against all these people about him. Christ! He must get away from
them all; his freedom had been hard enough won; he must enjoy it
to the uttermost.

"Say, I'm going to stick to you, Andy." Walters's voice broke into
his reverie. "I'm going to appoint you the corps of interpreters."

Andrews laughed.

"D'you know the way to the School Headquarters?"

"The R. T. O. said take the subway."

"I'm going to walk," said Andrews.

"You'll get lost, won't you?"

"No danger, worse luck," said Andrews, getting to his feet. "I'll
see you fellows at the School Headquarters, whatever those are....
So long."

"Say, Andy, I'll wait for you there," Walters called after him.

Andrews darted down a side street. He could hardly keep from
shouting aloud when he found himself alone, free, with days and
days ahead of him to work and think, gradually to rid his limbs of
the stiff attitudes of the automaton. The smell of the streets,
and the mist, indefinably poignant, rose like incense smoke in
fantastic spirals through his brain, making him hungry and
dazzled, making his arms and legs feel lithe and as ready for
delight as a crouching cat for a spring. His heavy shoes beat out
a dance as they clattered on the wet pavements under his springy
steps. He was walking very fast, stopping suddenly now and then to
look at the greens and oranges and crimsons of vegetables in a
push cart, to catch a vista down intricate streets, to look into
the rich brown obscurity of a small wine shop where workmen stood
at the counter sipping white wine. Oval, delicate faces, bearded
faces of men, slightly gaunt faces of young women, red cheeks of
boys, wrinkled faces of old women, whose ugliness seemed to have
hidden in it, stirringly, all the beauty of youth and the tragedy
of lives that had been lived; the faces of the people he passed
moved him like rhythms of an orchestra. After much walking,
turning always down the street which looked pleasantest, he came
to an oval with a statue of a pompous personage on a ramping
horse. "Place des Victoires," he read the name, which gave him a
faint tinge of amusement. He looked quizzically at the heroic
features of the sun king and walked off laughing. "I suppose they
did it better in those days, the grand manner," he muttered. And
his delight redoubled in rubbing shoulders with the people whose
effigies would never appear astride ramping-eared horses in
squares built to commemorate victories. He came out on a broad
straight avenue, where there were many American officers he had to
salute, and M. P.'s and shops with wide plate-glass windows, full
of objects that had a shiny, expensive look. "Another case of
victories," he thought, as he went off into a side street, taking
with him a glimpse of the bluish-grey pile of the Opera, with its
pompous windows and its naked bronze ladies holding lamps.

He was in a narrow street full of hotels and fashionable barber
shops, from which came an odor of cosmopolitan perfumery, of
casinos and ballrooms and diplomatic receptions, when he noticed
an American officer coming towards him, reeling a little,--a tall,
elderly man with a red face and a bottle nose. He saluted.

The officer stopped still, swaying from side to side, and said in
a whining voice:

"Shonny, d'you know where Henry'sh Bar is?"

"No, I don't, Major," said Andrews, who felt himself enveloped in
an odor of cocktails.

"You'll help me to find it, shonny, won't you?... It's dreadful
not to be able to find it.... I've got to meet Lootenant Trevors
in Henry'sh Bar." The major steadied himself by putting a hand on
Andrews' shoulder. A civilian passed them.

"Dee-donc," shouted the major after him, "Dee-donc, Monshier, ou
ay Henry'sh Bar?"

The man walked on without answering.

"Now isn't that like a frog, not to understand his own language?"
said the major.

"But there's Henry's Bar, right across the street," said Andrews
suddenly.

"Bon, bon," said the major.

They crossed the street and went in. At the bar the major, still
clinging to Andrews' shoulder, whispered in his ear: "I'm
A. W. O. L., shee?... Shee?.... Whole damn Air Service is
A. W. O. L. Have a drink with me.... You enlisted man? Nobody
cares here.... Warsh over, Sonny.... Democracy is shafe for
the world."

Andrews was just raising a champagne cocktail to his lips, looking
with amusement at the crowd of American officers and civilians who
crowded into the small mahogany barroom, when a voice behind him
drawled out:

"I'll be damned!"

Andrews turned and saw Henslowe's brown face and small silky
mustache. He abandoned his major to his fate.

"God, I'm glad to see you.... I was afraid you hadn't been able to
work it."...Said Henslowe slowly, stuttering a little.

"I'm about crazy, Henny, with delight. I just got in a couple of
hours ago...." Laughing, interrupting each other, they chattered
in broken sentences.

"But how in the name of everything did you get here?"

"With the major?" said Andrews, laughing.

"What the devil?"

"Yes; that major," whispered Andrews in his friend's ear, "rather
the worse for wear, asked me to lead him to Henry's Bar and just
fed me a cocktail in the memory of Democracy, late defunct.... But
what are you doing here? It's not exactly...exotic."

"I came to see a man who was going to tell me how I could get to
Rumania with the Red Cross.... But that can wait.... Let's get out
of here. God, I was afraid you hadn't made it."

"I had to crawl on my belly and lick people's boots to do
it.... God, it was low!... But here I am."

They were out in the street again, walking and gesticulating.

"But 'Libertad, Libertad, allons, ma femme!' as Walt Whitman would
have said," shouted Andrews.

"It's one grand and glorious  feeling.... I've been here three
days. My section's gone home; God bless them."

"But what do you have to do?"

"Do? Nothing," cried Henslowe. "Not a blooming bloody goddam
thing! In fact, it's no use trying...the whole thing is such a
mess you couldn't do anything if you wanted to."

"I want to go and talk to people at the Schola Cantorum."

"There'll be time for that. You'll never make anything out of
music if you get serious-minded about it."

"Then, last but not least, I've got to get some money from
somewhere."

"Now you're talking!" Henslowe pulled a burnt leather pocket book
out of the inside of his tunic. "Monaco," he said, tapping the
pocket book, which was engraved with a pattern of dull red
flowers. He pursed up his lips and pulled out some hundred franc
notes, which he pushed into Andrews's hand.

"Give me one of them," said Andrews.

"All or none.... They last about five minutes each."

"But it's so damn much to pay back."

"Pay it back--heavens!... Here take it and stop your talking. I
probably won't have it again, so you'd better make hay this time.
I warn you it'll be spent by the end of the week."

"All right. I'm dead with hunger."

"Let's sit down on the Boulevard and think about where we'll have
lunch to celebrate Miss Libertad.... But let's not call her that,
sounds like Liverpool, Andy, a horrid place."

"How about Freiheit?" said Andrews, as they sat down in basket
chairs in the reddish yellow sunlight.

"Treasonable...off with your head."

"But think of it, man," said Andrews, "the butchery's over, and
you and I and everybody else will soon be human beings again.
Human; all too human!"

"No more than eighteen wars going," muttered Henslowe.

"I haven't seen any papers for an age.... How do you mean?"

"People are fighting to beat the cats everywhere except on the'
western front," said Henslowe. "But that's where I come in. The
Red Cross sends supply trains to keep them at it.... I'm going to
Russia if I can work it."

"But what about the Sorbonne?"

"The Sorbonne can go to Ballyhack."

"But, Henny, I'm going to croak on your hands if you don't take me
somewhere to get some food."

"Do you want a solemn place with red plush or with salmon pink
brocade?"

"Why have a solemn place at all?"

"Because solemnity and good food go together. It's only a
religious restaurant that has a proper devotion to the belly. O, I
know, we'll go over to Brooklyn."

"Where?"

"To the Rive Gauche. I know a man who insists on calling it
Brooklyn. Awfully funny man...never been sober in his life. You
must meet him."

"Oh, I want to.... It's a dog's age since I met anyone new, except
you. I can't live without having a variegated crowd about, can
you?"

"You've got that right on this boulevard. Serbs, French, English,
Americans, Australians, Rumanians, Tcheco-Slovaks; God, is there
any uniform that isn't here?... I tell you, Andy, the war's been a
great thing for the people who knew how to take advantage of it.
Just look at their puttees."

"I guess they'll know how to make a good thing of the Peace too."

"Oh, that's going to be the best yet.... Come along. Let's be
little devils and take a taxi."

"This certainly is the main street of Cosmopolis."

They threaded their way through the crowd, full of uniforms and
glitter and bright colors, that moved in two streams up and down
the wide sidewalk between the cafes and the boles of the bare
trees. They climbed into a taxi, and lurched fast through streets
where, in the misty sunlight, grey-green and grey-violet mingled
with blues and pale lights as the colors mingle in a pigeon's
breast feathers. They passed the leafless gardens of the Tuileries
on one side, and the great inner Courts of the Louvre, with their
purple mansard roofs and their high chimneys on the other, and saw
for a second the river, dull jade green, and the plane trees
splotched with brown and cream color along the quais, before they
were lost in the narrow brownish-grey streets of the old quarters.

"This is Paris; that was Cosmopolis," said Henslowe.

"I'm not particular, just at present," cried Andrews gaily.

The square in front of the Odeon was a splash of white and the
collonade a blur of darkness as the cab swerved round the corner
and along the edge of the Luxembourg, where, through the black
iron fence, many brown and reddish colors in the intricate
patterns of leafless twigs opened here and there on statues and
balustrades and vistas of misty distances. The cab stopped with a
jerk.

"This is the Place des Medicis," said Henslowe.

At the end of a slanting street looking very flat, through the
haze, was the dome of the Pantheon. In the middle of the square
between the yellow trams and the green low busses, was a quiet
pool, where the shadow of horizontals of the house fronts was
reflected.

They sat beside the window looking out at the square.

Henslowe ordered.

"Remember how sentimental history books used to talk about
prisoners who were let out after years in dungeons, not being able
to stand it, and going back to their cells?"

"D'you like sole meuniere?"

"Anything, or rather everything! But take it from me, that's all
rubbish. Honestly I don't think I've ever been happier in my
life.... D'you know, Henslowe, there's something in you that is
afraid to be happy."

"Don't be morbid.... There's only one real evil in the world:
being somewhere without being able to get away;... I ordered beer.
This is the only place in Paris where it's fit to drink."

"And I'm going to every blooming concert...Colonne-Lamoureux on
Sunday, I know that.... The only evil in the world is not to be
able to hear music or to make it.... These oysters are fit for
Lucullus."

"Why not say fit for John Andrews and Bob Henslowe, damn
it?... Why the ghosts of poor old dead Romans should be dragged in
every time a man eats an oyster, I don't see. We're as fine
specimens as they were. I swear I shan't let any old turned-to-
clay Lucullus outlive me, even if I've never eaten a lamprey."

"And why should you eat a lamp--chimney, Bob?" came a hoarse voice
beside them.

Andrews looked up into a round, white face with large grey eyes
hidden behind thick steel-rimmed spectacles. Except for the eyes,
the face had a vaguely Chinese air.

"Hello, Heinz! Mr. Andrews, Mr. Heineman," said Henslowe.

"Glad to meet you," said Heineman in a jovially hoarse voice. "You
guys seem to be overeating, to reckon by the way things are piled
up on the table." Through the hoarseness Andrews could detect a
faint Yankee tang in Heineman's voice.

"You'd better sit down and help us," said Henslowe.

"Sure....D'you know my name for this guy?" He turned to
Andrews.... "Sinbad!"

"Sinbad was in bad in Tokio and Rome,
 In bad in Trinidad
 And twice as bad at home."

He sang the words loudly, waving a bread stick to keep time.

"Shut up, Heinz, or you'll get us run out of here the way you got
us run out of the Olympia that night."

They both laughed.

"An' d'you remember Monsieur Le Guy with his coat?

"Do I? God!" They laughed till the tears ran down their cheeks.
Heineman took off his glasses and wiped them. He turned to
Andrews.

"Oh, Paris is the best yet. First absurdity: the Peace Conference
and its nine hundred and ninety-nine branches. Second absurdity:
spies. Third: American officers A.W.O.L. Fourth: The seven sisters
sworn to slay." He broke out laughing again, his chunky body
rolling about on the chair.

"What are they?"

"Three of them have sworn to slay Sinbad, and four of them have
sworn to slay me.... But that's too complicated to tell at lunch
time.... Eighth: there are the lady relievers, Sinbad's specialty.
Ninth: there's Sinbad...."

"Shut up, Heinz, you're getting me maudlin," spluttered Henslowe.

"O Sinbad was in bad all around,"

chanted Heineman. "But no one's given me anything to drink," he
said suddenly in a petulant voice. "Garcon, une bouteille de
Macon, pour un Cadet de Gascogne.... What's the next? It ends with
vergogne. You've seen the play, haven't you? Greatest play
going.... Seen it twice sober and seven other times."

"Cyrano de Bergerac?"

"That's it. Nous sommes les Cadets de Gasgogne, rhymes with
ivrogne and sans vergogne.... You see I work in the Red Cross....
You know Sinbad, old Peterson's a brick.... I'm supposed to be
taking photographs of tubercular children at this minute.... The
noblest of my professions is that of artistic photographer....
Borrowed the photographs from the rickets man. So I have nothing
to do for three months and five hundred francs travelling
expenses. Oh, children, my only prayer is 'give us this day our
red worker's permit' and the Red Cross does the rest." Heineman
laughed till the glasses rang on the table. He took off his
glasses and wiped them with a rueful air.

"So now I call the Red Cross the Cadets!" cried Heineman, his
voice a thin shriek from laughter.

Andrews was drinking his coffee in little sips, looking out of the
window at the people that passed. An old woman with a stand of
flowers sat on a small cane chair at the corner. The pink and
yellow and blue-violet shades of the flowers seemed to intensify
the misty straw color and azured grey of the wintry sun and shadow
of the streets. A girl in a tight-fitting black dress and black
hat stopped at the stand to buy a bunch of pale yellow daisies,
and then walked slowly past the window of the restaurant in the
direction of the gardens. Her ivory face and slender body and her
very dark eyes sent a sudden flush through Andrews's whole frame
as he looked at her. The black erect figure disappeared in the
gate of the gardens.

Andrews got to his feet suddenly.

"I've got to go," he said in a strange voice.... "I just remember a
man was waiting for me at the School Headquarters."

"Let him wait."

"Why, you haven't had a liqueur yet," cried Heineman.

"No...but where can I meet you people later?"

"Cafe de Rohan at five...opposite the Palais Royal."

"You'll never find it."

"Yes I will," said Andrews.

"Palais Royal metro station," they shouted after him as he dashed
out of the door.

He hurried into the gardens. Many people sat on benches in the
frail sunlight. Children in bright-colored clothes ran about
chasing hoops. A woman paraded a bunch of toy balloons in carmine
and green and purple, like a huge bunch of parti-colored grapes
inverted above her head. Andrews walked up and down the alleys,
scanning faces. The girl had disappeared. He leaned against a grey
balustrade and looked down into the empty pond where traces of the
explosion of a Bertha still subsisted. He was telling himself that
he was a fool. That even if he had found her he could not have
spoken to her; just because he was free for a day or two from the
army he needn't think the age of gold had come back to earth.
Smiling at the thought, he walked across the gardens, wandered
through some streets of old houses in grey and white stucco with
slate mansard roofs and fantastic complications of chimney-pots
till he came out in front of a church with a new classic facade of
huge columns that seemed toppling by their own weight.

He asked a woman selling newspapers what the church's name was.
"Mais, Monsieur, c'est Saint Sulpice," said the woman in a
surprised tone.

Saint Sulpice. Manon's songs came to his head, and the sentimental
melancholy of eighteenth century Paris with its gambling houses in
the Palais Royal where people dishonored themselves in the
presence of their stern Catonian fathers, and its billets doux
written at little gilt tables, and its coaches lumbering in
covered with mud from the provinces through the Porte d'Orleans
and the Porte de Versailles; the Paris of Diderot and Voltaire and
Jean-Jacques, with its muddy streets and its ordinaries where one
ate bisques and larded pullets and souffles; a Paris full of
mouldy gilt magnificence, full of pompous ennui of the past and
insane hope of the future.

He walked down a narrow, smoky street full of antique shops and
old bookshops and came out unexpectedly on the river opposite the
statue of Voltaire. The name on the corner was quai Malaquais.
Andrews crossed and looked down for a long time at the river.
Opposite, behind a lace-work of leafless trees, were the purplish
roofs of the Louvre with their high peaks and their ranks and
ranks of chimneys; behind him the old houses of the quai and the
wing, topped by a balustrade with great grey stone urns of a domed
building of which he did not know the name. Barges were coming
upstream, the dense green water spuming under their blunt bows,
towed by a little black tugboat with its chimney bent back to pass
under the bridges. The tug gave a thin shrill whistle. Andrews
started walking downstream. He crossed by the bridge at the corner
of the Louvre, turned his back on the arch Napoleon built to
receive the famous horses from St. Marc's,--a pinkish pastry-like
affair--and walked through the Tuileries which were full of people
strolling about or sitting in the sun, of doll-like children and
nursemaids with elaborate white caps, of fluffy little dogs
straining at the ends of leashes. Suddenly a peaceful sleepiness
came over him. He sat down in the sun on a bench, watching, hardly
seeing them, the people who passed to and fro casting long
shadows. Voices and laughter came very softly to his ears above
the distant stridency of traffic. From far away he heard for a few
moments notes of a military band playing a march. The shadows of
the trees were faint blue-grey in the ruddy yellow gravel. Shadows
of people kept passing and repassing across them. He felt very
languid and happy.

Suddenly he started up; he had been dozing. He asked an old man
with a beautifully pointed white beard the way to rue du Faubourg
St. Honore.

After losing his way a couple of times, he walked listlessly up
some marble steps where a great many men in khaki were talking.
Leaning against the doorpost was Walters. As he drew near Andrews
heard him saying to the man next to him:

"Why, the Eiffel tower was the first piece of complete girder
construction ever built.... That's the first thing a feller who's
wide awake ought to see."

"Tell me the Opery's the grandest thing to look at," said the man
next it.

"If there's wine an' women there, me for it."

"An' don't forget the song."

"But that isn't interesting like the Eiffel tower is," persisted
Walters.

"Say, Walters, I hope you haven't been waiting for me," stammered
Andrews.

"No, I've been waiting in line to see the guy about courses.... I
want to start this thing right."

"I guess I'll see them tomorrow," said Andrews.

"Say have you done anything about a room, Andy? Let's you and me
be bunkies."

"All right.... But maybe you won't want to room where I do,
Walters."

"Where's that? In the Latin Quarter?... You bet. I want to see
some French life while I am about it."

"Well, it's too late to get a room to-day."

"I'm going to the 'Y' tonight anyway."

"I'll get a fellow I know to put me up.... Then tomorrow, we'll
see. Well, so long," said Andrews, moving away.

"Wait. I'm coming with you.... We'll walk around town together."

"All right," said Andrews.



The rabbit was rather formless, very fluffy and had a glance of
madness in its pink eye with a black center. It hopped like a
sparrow along the pavement, emitting a rubber tube from its back,
which went up to a bulb in a man's hand which the man pressed to
make the rabbit hop. Yet the rabbit had an air of organic
completeness. Andrews laughed inordinately when he first saw it.
The vendor, who had a basket full of other such rabbits on his
arm, saw Andrews laughing and drew timidly near to the table; he
had a pink face with little, sensitive lips rather like a real
rabbit's, and large frightened eyes of a wan brown.

"Do you make them yourself?" asked Andrews, smiling.

The man dropped his rabbit on the table with a negligent air.

"Oh, oui, Monsieur, d'apres la nature."

He made the rabbit turn a somersault by suddenly pressing the bulb
hard. Andrews laughed and the rabbit man laughed.

"Think of a big strong man making his living that way," said
Walters, disgusted.

"I do it all...de matiere premiere au profit de l'accapareur,"
said the rabbit man.

"Hello, Andy...late as hell.... I'm sorry," said Henslowe,
dropping down into a chair beside them. Andrews introduced
Walters, the rabbit man took off his hat, bowed to the company and
went off, making the rabbit hop before him along the edge of the
curbstone.

"What's happened to Heineman?"

"Here he comes now," said Henslowe.

An open cab had driven up to the curb in front of the cafe. In it
sat Heineman with a broad grin on his face and beside him a woman
in a salmon-colored dress, ermine furs and an emerald-green hat.
The cab drove off and Heineman, still grinning, walked up to the
table.

"Where's the lion cub?" asked Henslowe.

"They say it's got pneumonia."

"Mr. Heineman. Mr. Walters."

The grin left Heineman's face; he said: "How do you do?" curtly,
cast a furious glance at Andrews and settled himself in a chair.

The sun had set. The sky was full of lilac and bright purple and
carmine. Among the deep blue shadows lights were coming on,
primrose-colored street lamps, violet arc lights, ruddy sheets of
light poured out of shop windows.

"Let's go inside. I'm cold as hell," said Heineman crossly, and
they filed in through the revolving door, followed by a waiter
with their drinks.

"I've been in the Red Cross all afternoon, Andy.... I think I am
going to work that Roumania business.... Want to come?" said
Henslowe in Andrews' ear.

"If I can get hold of a piano and some lessons and the concerts
keep up you won't be able to get me away from Paris with wild
horses. No, sir, I want to see what Paris is like.... It's going
to my head so it'll be weeks before I know what I think about it."

"Don't think about it.... Drink," growled Heineman, scowling
savagely.

"That's two things I'm going to keep away from in Paris; drink and
women.... And you can't have one without the other," said Walters.

"True enough.... You sure do need them both," said Heineman.

Andrews was not listening to their talk; twirling the stem of his
glass of vermouth in his fingers, he was thinking of the Queen of
Sheba slipping down from off the shoulders of her elephant,
glistening fantastically with jewels in the light of crackling,
resinous torches. Music was seeping up through his mind as the
water seeps into a hole dug in the sand of the seashore. He could
feel all through his body the tension of rhythms and phrases
taking form, not quite to be seized as yet, still hovering on the
borderland of consciousness. "From the girl at the cross-roads
singing under her street-lamp to the patrician pulling roses to
pieces from the height of her litter....All the imaginings of your
desire...." He thought of the girl with skin like old ivory he had
seen in the Place de Medicis. The Queen of Sheba's face was like
that now in his imaginings, quiet and inscrutable. A sudden
cymbal-clanging of joy made his heart thump hard. He was free now
of the imaginings of his desire, to loll all day at cafe tables
watching the tables move in changing patterns before him, to fill
his mind and body with a reverberation of all the rhythms of men
and women moving in the frieze of life before his eyes; no more
like wooden automatons knowing only the motions of the drill
manual, but supple and varied, full of force and tragedy.

"For Heaven's sake let's beat it from here.... Gives me a pain
this place does." Heineman beat his fist on the table.

"All right," said Andrews, getting up with a yawn.

Henslowe and Andrews walked off, leaving Walters to follow them
with Heineman.

"We're going to dine at Le Rat qui Danse," said Henslowe, "an
awfully funny place.... We just have time to walk there
comfortably with an appetite."

They followed the long dimly-lighted Rue de Richelieu to the
Boulevards, where they drifted a little while with the crowd. The
glaring lights seemed to powder the air with gold. Cafes and the
tables outside were crowded. There was an odor of vermouth and
coffee and perfume and cigarette smoke mixed with the fumes of
burnt gasoline from taxicabs.

"Isn't this mad?" said Andrews.

"It's always carnival at seven on the Grands Boulevards."

They started climbing the steep streets to Montmartre. At a corner
they passed a hard-faced girl with rouge-smeared lips and over-
powdered cheeks, laughing on the arm of an American soldier, who
had a sallow face and dull-green eyes that glittered in the
slanting light of a street-lamp.

"Hello, Stein," said Andrews.

"Who's that?"

"A fellow from our division, got here with me this morning."

"He's got curious lips for a Jew," said Henslowe.

At the fork of two slanting streets, they went into a restaurant
that had small windows pasted over with red paper, through which
the light came dimly. Inside were crowded oak tables and oak
wainscoting with a shelf round the top, on which were shell-cans,
a couple of skulls, several cracked majolica plates and a number
of stuffed rats. The only people there were a fat woman and a man
with long grey hair and beard who sat talking earnestly over two
small glasses in the center of the room. A husky-looking waitress
with a Dutch cap and apron hovered near the inner door from which
came a great smell of fish frying in olive oil.

"The cook here's from Marseilles," said Henslowe, as they settled
themselves at a table for four.

"I wonder if the rest of them lost the way," said Andrews.

"More likely old Heinz stopped to have a drink," said Henslowe.
"Let's have some hors d'oeuvre while we are waiting."

The waitress brought a collection of boat-shaped plates of red
salads and yellow salads and green salads and two little wooden
tubs with herrings and anchovies.

Henslowe stopped her as she was going, saying: "Rien de plus?"

The waitress contemplated the array with a tragic air, her arms
folded over her ample bosom. "Que voulez-vous, Monsieur, c'est
l'armistice."

"The greatest fake about all this war business is the peace. I
tell you, not till the hors d'oeuvre has been restored to its
proper abundance and variety will I admit that the war's over."

The waitress tittered.

"Things aren't what they used to be," she said, going back to the
kitchen.

Heineman burst into the restaurant at that moment, slamming the
door behind him so that the glass rang, and the fat woman and the
hairy man started violently in their chairs. He tumbled into a
place, grinning broadly.

"And what have you done to Walters?"

Heineman wiped his glasses meticulously.

"Oh, he died of drinking raspberry shrub," he said.... "Dee-dong
peteet du ving de  Bourgogne," he  shouted towards the waitress in
his nasal French. Then he added: "Le Guy is coming in a minute, I
just met him."

The restaurant was gradually filling up with men and women of very
various costumes, with a good sprinkling of Americans in uniform
and out.

"God I hate people who don't drink," cried Heineman, pouring out
wine. "A man who don't drink just cumbers the earth."

"How are you going to take it in America when they have
prohibition?"

"Don't talk about it; here's le Guy. I wouldn't have him know I
belong to a nation that prohibits good liquor.... Monsieur le Guy,
Monsieur Henslowe et Monsieur Andrews," he continued getting up
ceremoniously. A little man with twirled mustaches and a small
vandyke beard sat down at the fourth place. He had a faintly red
nose and little twinkling eyes.

"How glad I am," he said, exposing his starched cuffs with a
curious gesture, "to have some one to dine with! When one begins
to get old loneliness is impossible. It is only youth that dares
think.... Afterwards  one has only one thing to think about: old
age."

"There's always work," said Andrews.

"Slavery. Any work is slavery. What is the use of freeing your
intellect if you sell yourself again to the first bidder?"

"Rot!" said Heineman, pouring out from a new bottle.

Andrews had begun to notice the girl who sat at the next table, in
front of a pale young soldier in French-blue who resembled her
extraordinarily. She had high cheek bones and a forehead in which
the modelling of the skull showed through the transparent,
faintly-olive skin. Her heavy chestnut hair was coiled carelessly
at the back of her head. She spoke very quietly, and pressed her
lips together when she smiled. She ate quickly and neatly, like a
cat.

The restaurant had gradually filled up with people. The waitress
and the patron, a fat man with a wide red sash coiled tightly
round his waist, moved with difficulty among the crowded tables. A
woman at a table in the corner, with dead white skin and drugged
staring eyes, kept laughing hoarsely, leaning her head, in a hat
with bedraggled white plumes, against the wall. There was a
constant jingle of plates and glasses, and an oily fume of food
and women's clothes and wine.

"D'you want to know what I really did with your friend?" said
Heineman, leaning towards Andrews.

"I hope you didn't push him into the Seine."

"It was damn impolite.... But hell, it was damn impolite of him
not to drink.... No use wasting time with a man who don't drink. I
took him into a cafe and asked him to wait while I telephoned. I
guess he's still waiting. One of the whoreiest cafes on the whole
Boulevard Clichy." Heineman laughed uproariously and started ex-
plaining it in nasal French to M. le Guy.

Andrews flushed with annoyance for a moment, but soon started
laughing. Heineman had started singing again.

"O, Sinbad was in bad in Tokio and Rome,
 In bad in Trinidad
 And twice as bad at home,
 O, Sinbad was in bad all around!"

Everybody clapped. The white-faced woman in the corner cried
"Bravo, Bravo," in a shrill nightmare voice.

Heineman bowed, his big grinning face bobbing up and down like the
face of a Chinese figure in porcelain.

"Lui est Sinbad," he cried, pointing with a wide gesture towards
Henslowe.

"Give 'em some more, Heinz. Give them some more," said Henslowe,
laughing.

"Big brunettes with long stelets
 On the shores of Italee,
 Dutch girls with golden curls
 Beside the Zuyder Zee..."

Everybody cheered again; Andrews kept looking at the girl at the
next table, whose face was red from laughter. She had a
handkerchief pressed to her mouth, and kept saying in a low voice:

"O qu'il est drole, celui-la.... O qu'il est drole."

Heineman picked up a glass and waved it in the air before drinking
it off. Several people got up and filled it up from their bottles
with white wine and red. The French soldier at the next table
pulled an army canteen from under his chair and hung it round
Heineman's neck.

Heineman, his face crimson, bowed to all sides, more like a
Chinese porcelain figure than ever, and started singing in all
solemnity this time.

"Hulas and hulas would pucker up their lips,
 He fell for their ball-bearing hips
 For they were pips ..."

His chunky body swayed to the ragtime. The woman in the corner
kept time with long white arms raised above her head.

"Bet she's a snake charmer," said Henslowe.

"O, wild woman loved that child
 He would drive ten women wild!
 O, Sinbad was in bad all around!"

Heineman waved his arms, pointed again to Henslowe, and sank into
his chair saying in the tones of a Shakespearean actor:

"C'est lui Sinbad."

The girl hid her face on the tablecloth, shaken with laughter.
Andrews could hear a convulsed little voice saying:

"O qu'il est rigolo...."

Heineman took off the canteen and handed it back to the French
soldier.

"Merci, Camarade," he said solemnly.

"Eh bien, Jeanne, c'est temps de ficher le camp," said the French
soldier to the girl. They got up. He shook hands with the
Americans. Andrews caught the girl's eye and they both started
laughing convulsively again. Andrews noticed how erect and supple
she walked as his eyes followed her to the door.

Andrews's party followed soon after.

"We've got to hurry if we want to get to the Lapin Agile before
closing...and I've got to have a drink," said Heineman, still
talking in his stagey Shakespearean voice.

"Have you ever been on the stage?" asked Andrews.

"What stage, sir? I'm in the last stages now, sir.... I am an
artistic photographer and none other.... Moki and I are going into
the movies together when they decide to have peace."

"Who's Moki?"

"Moki Hadj is the lady in the salmon-colored dress," said
Henslowe, in a loud stage whisper in Andrews's ear. "They have a
lion cub named Bubu."

"Our first born," said Heineman with a wave of the hand.

The streets were deserted. A thin ray of moonlight, bursting now
and then through the heavy clouds, lit up low houses and roughly-
cobbled streets and the flights of steps with rare dim lamps
bracketed in house walls that led up to the Butte.

There was a gendarme in front of the door of the Lapin Agile. The
street was still full of groups that had just come out, American
officers and Y.M.C.A, women with a sprinkling of the inhabitants
of the region.

"Now look, we're late," groaned Heineman in a tearful voice.

"Never mind, Heinz," said Henslowe, "le Guy'll take us to see de
Clocheville like he did last time, n'est pas, le Guy?" Then
Andrews heard him add, talking to a man he had not seen before,
"Come along Aubrey, I'll introduce you later."

They climbed further up the hill. There was a scent of wet gardens
in the air, entirely silent except for the clatter of their feet
on the cobbles. Heineman was dancing a sort of a jig at the head
of the procession. They stopped before a tall cadaverous house and
started climbing a rickety wooden stairway.

"Talk about inside dope.... I got this from a man who's actually
in the room when the Peace Conference meets." Andrews heard
Aubrey's voice with a Chicago burr in the r's behind him in the
stairs.

"Fine, let's hear it," said Henslowe.

"Did you say the Peace Conference took dope?" shouted Heineman,
whose puffing could be heard as he climbed the dark stairs ahead
of them.

"Shut up, Heinz."

They stumbled over a raised doorstep into a large garret room with
a tile floor, where a tall lean man in a monastic-looking dressing
gown of some brown material received them. The only candle made
all their shadows dance fantastically on the slanting white walls
as they moved about. One side of the room had three big windows,
with an occasional cracked pane mended with newspaper, stretching
from floor to ceiling. In front of them were two couches with rugs
piled on them. On the opposite wall was a confused mass of
canvases piled one against the other, leaning helter skelter
against the slanting wall of the room.

"C'est le bon vin, le bon vin,
 C'est la chanson du vin,"

chanted Heineman. Everybody settled themselves on couches. The
lanky man in the brown dressing gown brought a table out of the
shadow, put some black bottles and heavy glasses on it, and drew
up a camp stool for himself.

"He lives that way.... They say he never goes out. Stays here and
paints, and when friends come in, he feeds them wine and charges
them double," said Henslowe. "That's how he lives."

The lanky man began taking bits of candle out of a drawer of the
table and lighting them. Andrews saw that his feet and legs were
bare below the frayed edge of the dressing gown. The candle light
lit up the men's flushed faces and the crude banana yellows and
arsenic greens of the canvases along the walls, against which jars
full of paint brushes cast blurred shadows.

"I was going to tell you, Henny," said Aubrey, "the dope is that
the President's going to leave the conference, going to call them
all damn blackguards to their faces and walk out, with the band
playing the 'Internationale.'"

"God, that's news," cried Andrews.

"If he does that he'll recognize the Soviets," said Henslowe. "Me
for the first Red Cross Mission that goes to save starving
Russia.... Gee, that's great. I'll write you a postal from Moscow,
Andy, if they haven't been abolished as delusions of the
bourgeoisie."

"Hell, no.... I've got five hundred dollars' worth of Russian
bonds that girl Vera gave me.... But worth five million, ten
million, fifty million if the Czar gets back.... I'm backing the
little white father," cried Heineman. "Anyway Moki says he's
alive; that Savaroffs got him locked up in a suite in the Ritz....
And Moki knows."

"Moki knows a damn lot, I'll admit that," said Henslowe.

"But just think of it," said Aubrey, "that means world revolution
with the United States at the head of it. What do you think of
that?"

"Moki doesn't think so," said Heineman. "And Moki knows."

"She just knows what a lot of reactionary warlords tell her," said
Aubrey. "This man I was talking with at the Crillon--I wish I
could tell you his name--heard it directly from...Well, you know
who." He turned to Henslowe, who smiled knowingly. "There's a
mission in Russia at this minute making peace with Lenin."

"A goddam outrage!" cried Heineman, knocking a bottle off the
table. The lanky man picked up the pieces patiently, without
comment.

"The new era is opening, men, I swear it is..." began Aubrey. "The
old order is dissolving. It is going down under a weight of misery
and crime.... This will be the first great gesture towards a newer
and better world. There is no alternative. The chance will never
come back. It is either for us to step courageously forward, or
sink into unbelievable horrors of anarchy and civil war.... Peace
or the dark ages again."

Andrews had felt for some time an uncontrollable sleepiness coming
over him. He rolled himself on a rug and stretched out on the
empty couch. The voices arguing, wrangling, enunciating emphatic
phrases, dinned for a minute in his ears. He went to sleep.

When Andrews woke up he found himself staring at the cracked
plaster of an unfamiliar ceiling. For some moments he could not
guess where he was. Henslowe was sleeping, wrapped in another rug,
on the couch beside him. Except for Henslowe's breathing, there
was complete silence. Floods of silvery-grey light poured in
through the wide windows, behind which Andrews could see a sky
full of bright dove-colored clouds. He sat up carefully. Some time
in the night he must have taken off his tunic and boots and
puttees, which were on the floor beside the couch. The tables with
the bottles had gone and the lanky man was nowhere to be seen.

Andrews went to the window in his stockinged feet. Paris way a
slate-grey and dove-color lay spread out like a Turkish carpet,
with a silvery band of mist where the river was, out of which the
Eiffel Tower stood up like a man  wading. Here and there blue
smoke and brown spiralled up to lose itself in the faint canopy of
brown fog that hung high above the houses. Andrews stood a long
while leaning against the window frame, until he heard Henslowe's
voice behind him:

"Depuis le jour ou je me suis donnee."

"You look like 'Louise.'"

Andrews turned round.

Henslowe was sitting on the edge of the bed with his hair in
disorder, combing his little silky mustache with a pocket comb.

"Gee, I have a head," he said. "My tongue feels like a nutmeg
grater.... Doesn't yours?"

"No. I feel like a fighting cock."

"What do you say we go down to the Seine and have a bath in Benny
Franklin's bathtub?"

"Where's that? It sounds grand."

"Then we'll have the biggest breakfast ever."

"That's the right spirit.... Where's everybody gone to?"

"Old Heinz has gone to his Moki, I guess, and Aubrey's gone to
collect more dope at the Crillon. He says four in the morning when
the drunks come home is the prime time for a newspaper man."

"And the Monkish man?"

"Search me."

The streets were full of men and girls hurrying to work.
Everything sparkled, had an air of being just scrubbed. They
passed bakeries from which came a rich smell of fresh-baked bread.
From cafes came whiffs of roasting coffee. They crossed through
the markets that were full of heavy carts lumbering to and fro,
and women with net bags full of vegetables. There was a pungent
scent of crushed cabbage leaves and carrots and wet clay. The mist
was raw and biting along the quais, and made the blood come into
their cheeks and their hands stiff with cold.

The bathhouse was a huge barge with a house built on it in a
lozenge shape. They crossed to it by a little gangplank on which
were a few geraniums in pots. The attendant gave them two rooms
side by side on the lower deck, painted grey, with steamed over
windows, through which Andrews caught glimpses of hurrying green
water. He stripped his clothes off quickly. The tub was of copper
varnished with some white metal inside. The water flowed in
through two copper swans' necks. When Andrews stepped into the hot
green water, a little window in the partition flew open and
Henslowe shouted in to him:

"Talk about modern conveniences. You can converse while you
bathe!"

Andrews scrubbed himself jauntily with a square piece of pink
soap, splashing the water about like a small boy. He stood up and
lathered himself all over and then let himself slide into the
water, which splashed out over the floor.

"Do you think you're a performing seal?" shouted Henslowe.

"It's all so preposterous," cried Andrews, going off into
convulsions of laughter. "She has a lion cub named Bubu and
Nicolas Romanoff lives in the Ritz, and the Revolution is
scheduled for day after tomorrow at twelve noon."

"I'd put it about the first of May," answered Henslowe, amid a
sound of splashing. "Gee, it'd be great to be a people's
Commissary.... You could go and revolute the grand Llama of
Thibet."

"O, it's too deliciously preposterous," cried Andrews, letting
himself slide a second time into the bathtub.



                              II

Two M.P.'s passed outside the window. Andrews watched the yellow
pigskin revolver cases until they were out of sight. He felt
joyfully secure from them. The waiter, standing by the door with a
napkin on his arm, gave him a sense of security so intense it made
him laugh. On the marble table before him were a small glass of
beer, a notebook full of ruled sheets of paper and a couple of
yellow pencils. The beer, the color of topaz in the clear grey
light that streamed in through the window, threw a pale yellow
glow with a bright center on the table. Outside was the boulevard
with a few people walking hurriedly. An empty market wagon passed
now and then, rumbling loud. On a bench a woman in a black knitted
shawl, with a bundle of newspapers in her knees, was counting sous
with loving concentration.

Andrews looked at his watch. He had an hour before going to the
Schola Cantorum.

He got to his feet, paid the waiter and strolled down the center
of the boulevard, thinking smilingly of pages he had written, of
pages he was going to write, filled with a sense of leisurely
well-being. It was a grey morning with a little yellowish fog in
the air. The pavements were damp, reflected women's dresses and
men's legs and the angular outlines of taxicabs. From a flower
stand with violets and red and pink carnations irregular blotches
of color ran down into the brownish grey of the pavement. Andrews
caught a faint smell of violets in the smell of the fog as he
passed the flower stand and remembered suddenly that spring was
coming. He would not miss a moment of this spring, he told
himself; he would follow it step by step, from the first violets.
Oh, how fully he must live now to make up for all the years he had
wasted in his life.

He kept on walking along the boulevard. He was remembering how he
and the girl the soldier had called Jeanne had both kindled with
uncontrollable laughter when their eyes had met that night in the
restaurant. He wished he could go down the boulevard with a girl
like that, laughing through the foggy morning.

He wondered vaguely what part of Paris he was getting to, but was
too happy to care. How beautifully long the hours were in the
early morning!

At a concert at the Salle Gaveau the day before he had heard
Debussy's Nocturnes and Les  Sirenes. Rhythms from them were the
warp of all his thoughts. Against the background of the grey
street and the brownish fog that hung a veil at the end of every
vista he began to imagine rhythms of his own, modulations and
phrases that grew brilliant and faded, that flapped for a while
like gaudy banners above his head through the clatter of the
street.

He noticed that he was passing a long building with blank rows of
windows, at the central door of which stood groups of American
soldiers smoking. Unconsciously he hastened his steps, for fear of
meeting an officer he would have to salute. He passed the men
without looking at them.

A voice detained him. "Say, Andrews."

When he turned he saw that a short man with curly hair, whose
face, though familiar, he could not place, had left the group at
the door and was coming towards him. "Hello, Andrews.... Your
name's  Andrews, ain't it?"

"Yes." Andrews shook his hand, trying to remember.

"I'm Fuselli.... Remember? Last time I saw you you was goin' up to
the lines on a train with Chrisfield.... Chris we used to call
him.... At Cosne, don't you remember?"

"Of course I do."

"Well, what's happened to Chris?"

"He's a corporal now," said Andrews.

"Gee he is.... I'll be goddamned.... They was goin' to make me a
corporal once."

Fuselli wore stained olive-drab breeches and badly rolled puttees;
his shirt was open at the neck. From his blue denim jacket came a
smell of stale grease that Andrews recognised; the smell of army
kitchens. He had a momentary recollection of standing in line cold
dark mornings and of the sound the food made slopping into mess
kits.

"Why didn't they make you a corporal, Fuselli?" Andrcws said,
after a pause, in a constrained voice.

"Hell, I got in wrong, I suppose."

They were leaning against the dusty house wall. Andrews looked at
his feet. The mud of the pavement, splashing up on the wall, made
an even dado along the bottom, on which Andrews scraped the toe of
his shoe up and down.

"Well, how's everything?" Andrews asked looking up suddenly.

"I've been in a labor battalion. That's how everything is."

"God, that's tough luck!"

Andrews wanted to go on. He had a sudden fear that he would be
late. But he did not know how to break away.

"I got sick," said Fuselli grinning. "I guess I am yet, G. O. 42.
It's a hell of a note the way they treat a feller...like he was
lower than the dirt."

"Were you at Cosne all the time? That's damned rough luck,
Fuselli."

"Cosne sure is a hell of a hole.... I guess you saw a lot of
fighting. God! you must have been glad not to be in the goddam
medics."

"I don't know that I'm glad I saw fighting.... Oh, yes, I suppose
I am."

"You see, I had it a hell of a time before they found out. Court-
martial was damn stiff...after the armistice too.... Oh, God! why
can't they let a feller go home?"

A woman in a bright blue hat passed them. Andrews caught a glimpse
of a white over-powdered face; her hips trembled like jelly under
the blue skirt with each hard clack of her high heels on the
pavement.

"Gee, that looks like Jenny.... I'm glad she didn't see me...."
Fuselli laughed. "Ought to 'a seen her one night last week. We
were so dead drunk we just couldn't move."

"Isn't that bad for what's the matter with you?"

"I don't give a damn now; what's the use?"

"But God; man!" Andrews stopped himself suddenly. Then he said in
a different voice, "What outfit are you in now?"

"I'm on the permanent K.P. here," Fuselli jerked his thumb towards
the door of the building. "Not a bad job, off two days a week; no
drill, good eats.... At least you get all you want.... But it
surely has been hell emptying ash cans and shovelling coal an' now
all they've done is dry me up."

"But you'll be goin' home soon now, won't you? They can't
discharge you till they cure you."

"Damned if I know.... Some guys say a guy never can be cured...."

"Don't you find K.P. work pretty damn dull?"

"No worse than anything else. What are you doin" in Paris?"

"School detachment."

"What's that?"

"Men who wanted to study in the university, who managed to work
it."

"Gee, I'm glad I ain't goin' to school again."

"Well, so long, Fuselli."

"So long, Andrews."

Fuselli turned and slouched back to the group of men at the door.
Andrews hurried away. As he turned the corner he had a glimpse of
Fuselli with his hands in his pockets and his legs crossed leaning
against the wall behind the door of the barracks.



                              III

The darkness, where the rain fell through the vague halos of light
round the street lamps, glittered with streaks of pale gold.
Andrews's ears were full of the sound of racing gutters and
spattering waterspouts, and of the hard unceasing beat of the rain
on the pavements. It was after closing time. The corrugated
shutters were drawn down, in front of cafe windows. Andrews's cap
was wet; water trickled down his forehead and the sides of his
nose, running into his eyes. His feet were soaked and he could
feel the wet patches growing on his knees where they received the
water running off his overcoat. The street stretched wide and dark
ahead of him, with an occasional glimmer of greenish reflection
from a lamp. As he walked, splashing with long strides through the
rain, he noticed that he was keeping pace with a woman under an
umbrella, a slender person who was hurrying with small resolute
steps up the boulevard. When he saw her, a mad hope flamed
suddenly through him. He remembered a vulgar little theatre and
the crude light of a spot light. Through the paint and powder a
girl's golden-brown skin had shone with a firm brilliance that
made him think of wide sun-scorched uplands, and dancing figures
on Greek vases. Since he had seen her two nights ago, he had
thought of nothing else. He had feverishly found out her name.
"Naya Selikoff!" A mad hope flared through him that this girl he
was walking beside was the girl whose slender limbs moved in an
endless frieze through his thoughts. He peered at her with eyes
blurred with rain. What an ass he was! Of course it couldn't be;
it was too early. She was on the stage at this minute. Other
hungry eyes were staring at her slenderness, other hands were
twitching to stroke her golden-brown skin. Walking under the
steady downpour that stung his face and ears and sent a tiny cold
trickle down his back, he felt a sudden dizziness of desire come
over him. His hands, thrust to the bottom of his coat pockets,
clutched convulsively. He felt that he would die, that his
pounding blood vessels would burst. The bead curtains of rain
rustled and tinkled about him, awakening his nerves, making his
skin flash and tingle. In the gurgle of water in gutters and water
spouts he could imagine he heard orchestras droning libidinous
music. The feverish excitement of his senses began to create
frenzied rhythms in his ears:

"O ce pauvre poilu! Qu'il doit etre mouille" said a small
tremulous voice beside him.

He turned.

The girl was offering him part of her umbrella.

"O c'est un Americain!" she said again, still speaking as if to
herself.

"Mais ca ne vaut pas la peine."

"Mais oui, mais oui."

He stepped under the umbrella beside her.

"But you must let me hold it."

"Bien."

As he took the umbrella he caught her eye. He stopped still in his
tracks.

"But you're the girl at the Rat qui Danse."

"And you were at the next table with the man who sang?"

"How amusing!"

"Et celui-la! O il etait rigolo...." She burst out laughing; her
head, encased in a little round black hat, bobbed up and down
under the umbrella. Andrews laughed too. Crossing the Boulevard
St. Germain, a taxi nearly ran them down and splashed a great wave
of mud over them. She clutched his arm and then stood roaring with
laughter.

"O quelle horreur! Quelle horreur!" she kept exclaiming.

Andrews laughed and laughed.

"But hold the umbrella over us.... You're letting the rain in on
my best hat," she said again.

"Your name is Jeanne," said Andrews.

"Impertinent! You heard my brother call me that.... He went back
to the front that night, poor little chap.... He's only nineteen
...he's very clever.... O, how happy I am now that the war's
over."

"You are older than he?"

"Two years.... I am the head of the family.... It is a dignified
position."

"Have you always lived in Paris?"

"No, we are from Laon.... It's the war."

"Refugees?"

"Don't call us that.... We work."

Andrews laughed.

"Are you going far?" she asked peering in his face.

"No, I live up here.... My name is the same as yours."

"Jean? How funny!"

"Where are you going?"

"Rue Descartes.... Behind St. Etienne."

"I live near you."

"But you mustn't come. The concierge is a tigress.... Etienne
calls her Mme. Clemenceau."

"Who? The saint?"

"No, you silly--my brother. He is a socialist. He's a typesetter
at l'Humanite."

"Really? I often read l'Humanite."

"Poor boy, he used to swear he'd never go in the army. He thought
of going to America."

"That wouldn't do him any good now," said Andrews bitterly. "What
do you do?"

"I?" a gruff bitterness came into her voice. "Why should I tell
you? I work at a dressmaker's."

"Like Louise?"

"You've heard Louise? Oh, how I cried."

"Why did it make you sad?"

"Oh, I don't know.... But I'm learning stenography.... But here we
are!"

The great bulk of the Pantheon stood up dimly through the rain
beside them. In front the tower of St. Etienne-du-Mont was just
visible. The rain roared about them.

"Oh, how wet I am!" said Jeanne.

"Look, they are giving Louise day after tomorrow at the Opera
Comique.... Won't you come; with me?"

"No, I should cry too much."

"I'll cry too."

"But it's not..."

"Cest l'armistice," interrupted Andrews.

They both laughed!

"All right! Meet me at the cafe at the end of the Boul' Mich' at a
quarter past seven.... But you probably won't come."

"I swear I will," cried Andrews eagerly.

"We'll see!" She darted away down the street beside St. Etienne-
du-Mont. Andrews was left alone amid the seethe of the rain and
the tumultuous gurgle of water-spouts. He felt calm and tired.

When he got to his room, he found he had no matches in his pocket.
No light came from the window through which he could hear the
hissing clamor of the rain in the court. He stumbled over a chair.

"Are you drunk?" came Walters's voice swathed in bedclothes.
"There are matches on the table."

"But where the hell's the table?"

At last his hand, groping over the table, closed on the matchbox.

The match's red and white flicker dazzled him. He blinked his
eyes; the lashes were still full of raindrops. When he had lit a
candle and set it amongst the music papers upon the table, he tore
off his dripping clothes.

"I just met the most charming girl, Walters," Andrews stood naked
beside the pile of his clothes, rubbing himself with a towel.
"Gee! I was wet.... But she was the most charming person I've met
since I've been in Paris."

"I thought you said you let the girls alone."

"Whores, I must have said."

"Well! Any girl you could pick up on the street...."

"Nonsense!"

"I guess they are all that way in this damned country.... God, it
will do me good to see a nice sweet wholesome American girl."

Andrews did not answer. He blew out the light and got into bed.

"But I've got a new job," Walters went on. "I'm working in the
school detachment office."

"Why the hell do that? You came here to take courses in the
Sorbonne, didn't you?"

"Sure. I go to most of them now. But in this army I like to be in
the middle of things, see? Just so they can't put anything over on
me."

"There's something in that."

"There's a damn lot in it, boy. The only way is to keep in right
and not let the man higher up forget you.... Why, we may start
fighting again. These damn Germans ain't showin' the right spirit
at all...after all the President's done for them. I expect to get
my sergeantcy out of it anyway."

"Well, I'm going to sleep," said Andrews sulkily.



John Andrews sat at a table outside the cafe de Rohan. The sun had
just set on a ruddy afternoon, flooding everything with violet-
blue light and cold greenish shadow. The sky was bright lilac
color, streaked with a few amber clouds. The lights were on in all
the windows of the Magazin du Louvre opposite, so that the windows
seemed bits of polished glass in the afterglow. In the colonnade
of the Palais Royal the shadows were deepening and growing colder.
A steady stream of people poured in and out of the Metro. Green
buses stuffed with people kept passing. The roar of the traffic
and the clatter of footsteps and the grumble of voices swirled
like dance music about Andrews's head. He noticed all at once that
the rabbit man stood in front of him, a rabbit dangling forgotten
at the end of its rubber tube.

"Et ca va bien? le commerce," said Andrews.

"Quietly, quietly," said the rabbit man, distractedly making the
rabbit turn a somersault at his feet. Andrews watched the people
going into the Metro.

"The gentleman amuses himself in Paris?" asked the rabbit man
timidly.

"Oh, yes; and you?"

"Quietly," the rabbit man smiled. "Women are very beautiful at
this hour of the evening," he said again in his very timid tone.

"There is nothing more beautiful than this moment of the
evening...in Paris."

"Or Parisian women." The eyes of the rabbit man glittered. "Excuse
me, sir," he went on. "I must try and sell some rabbits."

"Au revoir," said Andrews holding out his hand.

The rabbit man shook it with sudden vigor and went off, making a
rabbit hop before him along the curbstone. He was hidden by the
swiftly moving crowds.

In the square, flaring violet arclights were flickering on,
lighting up their net-covered globes that hung like harsh moons
above the pavement.

Henslowe sat down on a chair beside Andrews.

"How's Sinbad?"

"Sinbad, old boy, is functioning.... Aren't yon frozen?"

"How do you mean, Henslowe?"

"Overheated, you chump, sitting out here in polar weather."

"No, but I mean.... How are you functioning?" said Andrews
laughing.

"I'm going to Poland tomorrow."

"How?"

"As guard on a Red Cross supply train. I think you might make it
if you want to come, if we beat it right over to the Red Cross
before Major Smithers goes. Or we might take him out to dinner."

"But, Henny, I'm staying."

"Why the hell stay in this hole?"

"I like it. I'm getting a better course in orchestration than I
imagined existed, and I met a girl the other day, and I'm crazy
over Paris."

"If you go and get entangled, I swear I'll beat your head in with
a Polish shillaughly.... Of course you've met a girl--so have I--
lots. We can meet some more in Poland and dance polonaises with
them."

"No, but this girl's charming.... You've seen her. She's the girl
who was with the poilu at the Rat qui Danse the first night I was
in Paris. We went to Louise together."

"Must have been a grand sentimental party.... I swear.... I may
run after a Jane now and again but I never let them interfere with
the business of existence," muttered Henslowe crossly.

They were both silent.

"You'll be as bad as Heinz with his Moki and the lion cub named
Bubu.... By the way, it's dead.... Well,  where shall we have
dinner?"

"I'm dining with Jeanne.... I'm going to meet her in half an
hour.... I'm awfully sorry, Henny. We might all dine together."

"A fat chance! No, I'll have to go and find that ass Aubrey, and
hear all about the Peace Conference.... Heinz can't leave Moki
because she's having hysterics on account of Bubu. I'll probably
be driven to going to see Berthe in the end.... You're a nice
one."

"We'll have a grand seeing-off party for you tomorrow, Henny."

"Look! I forgot! You're to meet Aubrey at the Crillon at five
tomorrow, and he's going to take you to see Genevieve Rod?"

"Who the hell's Genevieve Rod?"

"Darned if I know. But Aubrey said you'd got to come. She is an
intellectual, so Aubrey says."

"That's the last thing I want to meet."

"Well, you can't help yourself. So long!"

Andrews sat a while more at the table outside the cafe. A cold
wind was blowing. The sky was blue-black and the ashen white arc
lamps cast a mortuary light over everything. In the Colonnade of
the Palais Royal the shadows were harsh and inky. In the square
the people were gradually thinning. The lights in the Magazin du
Louvre had gone out. From the cafe behind him, a faint smell of
fresh-cooked food began to saturate the cold air of the street.

Then he saw Jeanne advancing across the ash-grey pavement of the
square, slim and black under the arc lights. He ran to meet her.



The cylindrical stove in the middle of the floor roared softly. In
front of it the white cat was rolled into a fluffy ball in which
ears and nose made tiny splashes of pink like those at the tips of
the petals of certain white roses. One side of the stove at the
table against the window, sat an old brown man with a bright red
stain on each cheek bone, who wore formless corduroy clothes, the
color of his skin. Holding the small spoon in a knotted hand he
was stirring slowly and continuously a liquid  that was yellow and
steamed in a glass. Behind him was the window with sleet beating
against it in the leaden light of a wintry afternoon. The other
side of the stove was a zinc bar with yellow bottles and green
bottles and a water spigot with a neck like a giraffe's that rose
out of the bar beside a varnished wood pillar that made the
decoration of the corner, with a terra cotta pot of ferns on top
of it. From where Andrews sat on the padded bench at the back of
the room the fern fronds made a black lacework against the left-
hand side of the window, while against the other was the brown
silhouette of the old man's head, and the slant of his cap. The
stove hid the door and the white cat, round and symmetrical,
formed the center of the visible universe. On the marble table
beside Andrews were some pieces of crisp bread with butter on
them, a saucer of damson jam and a bowl with coffee and hot milk
from which the steam rose in a faint spiral. His tunic was
unbuttoned and he rested his head on his two hands, staring
through his fingers at a thick pile of ruled paper full of hastily
drawn signs, some in ink and some in pencil, where now and then he
made a mark with a pencil. At the other edge of the pile of papers
were two books, one yellow and one white with coffee stains on it.

The fire roared and the cat slept and the old brown man stirred
and stirred, rarely stopping for a moment to lift the glass to his
lips. Occasionally the scratching of sleet upon the windows became
audible, or there was a distant sound of dish pans through the
door in the back.

The sallow-faced clock that hung above the mirror that backed the
bar, jerked out one jingly strike, a half hour. Andrews did not
look up. The cat still slept in front of the stove which roared
with a gentle singsong. The old brown man still stirred the yellow
liquid in his glass. The clock was ticking uphill towards the
hour.

Andrews's hands were cold. There was a nervous flutter in his
wrists and in his chest. Inside of him was a great rift of light,
infinitely vast and infinitely distant. Through it sounds poured
from somewhere, so that he trembled with them to his finger tips,
sounds modulated into rhythms that washed back and forth and
crossed each other like sea waves in a cove, sounds clotted into
harmonies.

Behind everything the Queen of Sheba, out of Flaubert, held her
fantastic hand with its long, gilded finger nails on his shoulder;
and he was leaning forward over the brink of life. But the image
was vague, like a shadow cast on the brilliance of his mind.

The clock struck four.

The white fluffy ball of the cat unrolled very slowly. Its eyes
were very round and yellow. It put first one leg and then the
other out before it on the tiled floor, spreading wide the pinkey-
grey claws. Its tail rose up behind it straight as the mast of a
ship. With slow processional steps the cat walked towards the
door.

The old brown man drank down the yellow liquid and smacked his
lips twice, loudly, meditatively.

Andrews raised his head, his blue eyes looking straight before him
without seeing anything. Dropping the pencil, he leaned back
against the wall and stretched his arms out. Taking the coffee
bowl between his two hands, he drank s little. It was cold. He
piled some jam on a piece of bread and ate it, licking a little
off his fingers afterwards. Then he looked towards the old brown
man and said:

"On est bien ici, n'est ce pas, Monsieur Morue?"

"Oui, on est bien ici," said the old brown man in a voice so gruff
it seemed to rattle. Very slowly he got to his feet.

"Good. I am going to the barge," he said. Then he called,
"Chipette!"

"Oui, m'sieu."

A little girl in a black apron with her hair in two tight pigtails
that stood out behind her tiny bullet head as she ran, came
through the door from the back part of the house.

"There, give that to your mother," said the old brown man, putting
some coppers in her hand.

"Oui, m'sieu."

"You'd better stay here where it's warm," said Andrews yawning.

"I have to work. It's only soldiers don't have to work," rattled
the old brown man.

When the door opened a gust of raw air circled about the wine
shop, and a roar of wind and hiss of sleet came from the slush-
covered quai outside. The cat took refuge beside the stove, with
its back up and its tail waving. The door closed and the old brown
man's silhouette, slanted against the wind, crossed the grey
oblong of the window.

Andrews settled down to work again.

"But you work a lot a lot, don't you; M'sieu Jean?" said Chipette,
putting her chin on the table beside the books and looking up into
his eyes with little eyes like black beads.

"I wonder if I do."

"When I'm grown up I shan't work a bit. I'll drive round in a
carriage."

Andrews laughed. Chipette looked at him for a minute and then went
into the other room carrying away the empty coffee bowl.

In front of the stove the cat sat on its haunches, licking a paw
rhythmically with a pink curling tongue like a rose petal.

Andrews whistled a few bars, staring at the cat.

"What d'you think of that, Minet? That's la reine de Saba...la
reine de Saba."

The cat curled into a ball again with great deliberation and went
to sleep.

Andrews began thinking of Jeanne and the thought gave him a sense
of quiet well-being. Strolling with her in the evening through the
streets full of men and women walking significantly together sent
a languid calm through his jangling nerves which he had never
known in his life before. It excited him to be with her, but very
suavely, so that he forgot that his limbs were swathed stiffly in
an uncomfortable uniform, so that his feverish desire seemed to
fly out of him until with her body beside him, he seemed to drift
effortlessly in the stream of the lives of all the people he
passed, so languid, from the quiet loves that streamed up about
him that the hard walls of his personality seemed to have melted
entirely into the mistiness of twilight streets. And for a moment
as he thought of it a scent of flowers, heavy with pollen, and
sprouting grass and damp moss and swelling sap, seemed to tingle
in his nostrils. Sometimes, swimming in the ocean on a rough day,
he had felt that same reckless exhilaration when, towards the
shore, a huge seething wave had caught him up and sped him forward
on its crest. Sitting quietly in the empty wine shop that grey
afternoon, he felt his blood grumble and swell in his veins as the
new life was grumbling and swelling in the sticky buds of the
trees, in the tender green quick under their rough bark, in the
little furry animals of the woods and in the sweet-smelling cattle
that tramped into mud the lush meadows. In the premonition of
spring was a resistless wave of force that carried him and all of
them with it tumultuously.

The clock struck five.

Andrews jumped to his feet and still struggling into his overcoat
darted out of the door.

A raw wind blew on the square. The river was a muddy grey-green,
swollen and rapid. A hoarse triumphant roaring came from it. The
sleet had stopped; but the pavements were covered with slush and
in the gutters were large puddles which the wind ruffled.
Everything,--houses, bridges, river and sky,--was in shades of
cold grey-green, broken by one jagged ochre-colored rift across
the sky against which the bulk of Notre Dame and the slender spire
of the crossing rose dark and purplish. Andrews walked with long
strides, splashing through the puddles, until, opposite the low
building of the Morgue, he caught a crowded green bus.

Outside the Hotel Crillon were many limousines, painted olive-
drab, with numbers in white letters on the doors; the drivers, men
with their olive-drab coat collars turned up round their red
faces, stood in groups under the portico. Andrews passed the
sentry and went through the revolving doors into the lobby, which
was vividly familiar. It had the smell he remembered having smelt
in the lobbies of New York hotels,--a smell of cigar smoke and
furniture polish. On one side a door led to a big dining room
where many men and women were having tea, from which came a smell
of pastry and rich food. On the expanse of red carpet in front of
him officers and civilians stood in groups talking in low voices.
There was a sound of jingling spurs and jingling dishes from the
restaurant, and near where Andrews stood shifting his weight from
one foot to the other, sprawled in a leather chair a fat man with
a black felt hat over his eyes and a large watch chain dangling
limply over his bulbous paunch. He cleared his  throat
occasionally with a  rasping noise  and  spat loudly into the
spittoon beside him.

At last Andrews caught sight of Aubrey, who was dapper with white
cheeks and tortoise shell glasses.

"Come along," he said, seizing Andrews by the arm.

"You are late." Then, he went on, whispering in Andrews's ear as
they went out through the revolving doors: "Great things happened
in the Conference today.... I can tell you that, old man."

They crossed the bridge  towards  the  portico of   the Chamber of
Deputies with its high pediment and its grey columns. Down the
river they could see faintly the Eiffel Tower with a drift of mist
athwart it, like a section of spider web spun between the city and
the clouds.

"Do we have to go to see these people, Aubrey?"

"Yes, you can't back out now. Genevieve Rod wants to know about
American music."

"But what on earth can I tell her about American music?"

"Wasn't there a man named MacDowell who went mad or something?"
Andrews laughed.

"But you know I haven't any social graces.... I suppose I'll have
to say I think Foch is a little tin god."

"You needn't say anything if you don't want to.... They're very
advanced, anyway."

"Oh, rats!"

They were going up a brown-carpeted stair that had engravings on
the landings, where there was a faint smell of stale food and
dustpans. At the top landing Aubrey rang the bell at a varnished
door. In a moment a girl opened it. She had a cigarette in her
hand, her face was pale under a mass of reddish-chestnut hair, her
eyes very large, a pale brown, as large as the eyes of women in
those paintings of Artemisias and Berenikes found in tombs in the
Fayum. She wore a plain black dress.

"Enfin!" she said, and held out her hand to Aubrey.

"There's my friend Andrews."

She held out her hand to him absently, still looking at Aubrey.

"Does he speak French?... Good.... This way." They went into a
large room with a piano where an elderly woman, with grey hair and
yellow teeth and the same large eyes as her daughter, stood before
the fireplace.

"Maman...enfin ils arrivent, ces messieurs."

"Genevieve was afraid you weren't coming," Mme. Rod said to
Andrews, smiling. "Monsieur Aubrey gave us such a picture of your
playing that we have been excited all day.... We adore music."

"I wish I could do something more to the point with it than adore
it," said Genevieve Rod hastily, then she went on with a laugh:
"But I forget..... Monsieur Andreffs.... Monsieur Ronsard." She
made a gesture with her hand from Andrews to a young Frenchman in
a cut-away coat, with small mustaches and a very tight vest, who
bowed towards Andrews.

"Now we'll have tea," said Genevieve Rod. "Everybody talks sense
until they've had tea.... It's only after tea that anyone is ever
amusing." She pulled open some curtains that covered the door into
the adjoining room.

"I understand why Sarah Bernhardt is so fond of curtains," she
said. "They give an air of drama to existence.... There is nothing
more heroic than curtains."

She sat at the head of an oak table where were china platters with
vari-colored pastries, an old pewter kettle under which an alcohol
lamp burned, a Dresden china teapot in pale yellows and greens,
and cups and saucers and plates with a double-headed eagle design
in dull vermilion. "Tout ca," said Genevieve, waving her hand
across the table, "c'est Boche.... But we haven't any others, so
they'll have to do."

The older woman, who sat beside her, whispered something in her
ear and laughed.

Genevieve put on a pair of tortoise-shell spectacles and starting
pouring out tea.

"Debussy once drank out of that cup..... It's cracked," she said,
handing a cup to John Andrews. "Do you know anything of
Moussorgski's you can play to us after tea?"

"I can't play anything any more.... Ask me three months from now."

"Oh, yes; but nobody expects you to do any tricks with it. You can
certainly make it intelligible. That's all I want."

"I have my doubts."

Andrews sipped his tea slowly, looking now and then at Genevieve
Rod who had suddenly begun talking very fast to Ronsard. She held
a cigarette between the fingers of a long thin hand. Her large
pale-brown eyes kept their startled look of having just opened on
the world; a little smile appeared and disappeared maliciously in
the curve of her cheek away from her small firm lips. The older
woman beside her kept looking round the table with a jolly air of
hospitality, and showing her yellow teeth in a smile.

Afterwards they went back to the sitting room and Andrews sat down
at the piano. The girl sat very straight on a little chair beside
the piano. Andrews ran his fingers up and down the keys.

"Did you say you knew Debussy?" he said suddenly. "I? No; but he
used to come to see my father when I was a little girl.... I have
been brought up in the middle of music.... That shows how silly it
is to be a woman. There is no music in my head. Of course I am
sensitive to it, but so are the tables and chairs in this
apartment, after all they've heard."

 Andrews started playing Schumann. He stopped suddenly.

"Can you sing?" he said.

"No."

"I'd like to do the Proses Lyriques.... I've never heard them."

"I once tried to sing Le Soir," she said.

"Wonderful. Do bring it out."

"But, good Lord, it's too difficult."

"What is the use of being fond of music if you aren't willing to
mangle it for the sake of producing it?... I swear I'd rather hear
a man picking out Aupres de ma Blonde on a trombone that Kreisler
playing Paganini impeccably enough to make you ill."

"But there is a middle ground."

He interrupted her by starting to play again. As he played without
looking at her, he felt that her eyes were fixed on him, that she
was standing tensely behind him. Her hand touched his shoulder. He
stopped playing.

"Oh, I am dreadfully sorry," she said.

"Nothing. I am finished."

"You were playing something of your own?"

"Have you ever read La Tentation de Saint Antoine?" he asked in a
low voice.

"Flaubert's?"

"Yes."

"It's not his best work. A very interesting failure though," she
said.

Andrews got up from the piano with difficulty, controlling a
sudden growing irritation.

"They seem to teach everybody to say that," he muttered.

Suddenly he realized that other people were in the room. He went
up to Mme. Rod.

"You must excuse me," he said, "I have an engagement.... Aubrey,
don't let me drag you away. I am late, I've got to run."

"You must come to see us again."

"Thank you," mumbled Andrews.

Genevieve Rod went with him to the door. "We must know each other
better," she said. "I like you for going off in a huff."

Andrews flushed.

"I was badly brought up," he said, pressing her thin cold hand.
"And you French must always remember that we are barbarians....
Some are repentant barbarians.... I am not."

She laughed, and John Andrews ran down the stairs and out into the
grey-blue streets, where the lamps were blooming into primrose
color. He had a confused feeling that he had made a fool of
himself, which made him writhe with helpless anger. He walked with
long strides through the streets of the Rive Gauche full of people
going home from work, towards the little wine shop on the Quai de
la Tournelle.



It was a Paris Sunday morning. Old women in black shawls were
going into the church of St. Etienne-du-Mont. Each time the
leather doors opened it let a little whiff of incense out into the
smoky morning air. Three pigeons walked about the cobblestones,
putting their coral feet one before the other with an air of
importance. The pointed facade of the church and its slender tower
and cupola cast a bluish shadow on the square in front of it, into
which the shadows the old women trailed behind them vanished as
they hobbled towards the church. The opposite side of the square
and the railing of the Pantheon and its tall brownish-gray flank
were flooded with dull orange-colored sunlight.

Andrews walked back and forth in front of the church, looking at
the sky and the pigeons and the facade of the Library of Ste.
Genevieve, and at the rare people who passed across the end of the
square, noting forms and colors and small comical aspects of
things with calm delight, savoring everything almost with
complacency. His music, he felt, was progressing now that,
undisturbed, he lived all day long in the rhythm of it; his mind
and his fingers were growing supple. The hard moulds that had
grown up about his spirit were softening. As he walked back and
forth in front of the church waiting for Jeanne, he took an
inventory of his state of mind; he was very happy.

"Eh bien?"

Jeanne had come up behind him. They ran like children hand in hand
across the sunny square.

"I have not had any coffee yet," said Andrews.

"How late you must get up!... But you can't have any till we get
to the Porte Maillot, Jean."

"Why not?"

"Because I say you can't."

"But that's cruelty."

"It won't be long."

"But I am dying with hunger. I will die in your hands."

"Can't you understand? Once we get to the Porte Maillot we'll be
far from your life and my life. The day will be ours. One must not
tempt fate."

"You funny girl."

The Metro was not crowded, Andrews and Jeanne sat opposite each
other without talking. Andrews was looking at the girl's hands,
limp on her lap, small overworked hands with places at the tips of
the fingers where the skin was broken and scarred, with chipped
uneven nails. Suddenly she caught his glance. He flushed, and she
said jauntily:

"Well, we'll all be rich some day, like princes and princesses in
fairy tales." They both laughed.

As they were leaving the train at the terminus, he put his arm
timidly round her waist. She wore no corsets. His fingers trembled
at the litheness of the flesh under her clothes. Feeling a sort of
terror go through him he took away his arm.

"Now," she said quietly as they emerged into the sunlight and the
bare trees of the broad avenue, "you can have all the cafe-au-lait
you want."

"You'll have some too."

"Why be extravagant? I've had my petit dejeuner."

"But I'm going to be extravagant all day.... We might as well
start now. I don't know exactly why, but I am very happy. We'll
eat brioches."

"But, my dear, it's only profiteers who can eat brioches now-a-
days."

"You just watch us."

They went into a patisserie. An elderly woman with a lean yellow
face and thin hair waited on them, casting envious glances up
through her eyelashes as she piled the rich brown brioches on a
piece of tissue paper.

"You'll pass the day in the country?" she asked in a little
wistful voice as she handed Andrews the change.

"Yes," he said, "how well you guessed."

As they went out of the door they heard her muttering, "O la
jeunesse, la jeunesse."

They found a table in the sun at a cafe opposite the gate from
which they could watch people and automobiles and carriages coming
in and out. Beyond, a grass-grown bit of fortifications gave an
1870 look to things.

"How jolly it is at the Porte Maillot!" cried Andrews.

She looked at him and laughed.

"But how gay he is to-day."

"No. I always like it here. It's the spot in Paris where you
always feel well.... When you go out you have all the fun of
leaving town, when you go in you have all the fun of coming back
to town.... But you aren't eating any brioches?"

"I've eaten one. You eat them. You are hungry."

"Jeanne, I don't think I have ever been so happy in my life....
It's almost worth having been in the army for the joy your freedom
gives you. That frightful life.... How is Etienne?"

"He is in Mayence. He's bored."

"Jeanne, we must live very much, we who are free to make up for
all the people who are still...bored."

"A lot of good it'll do them," she cried laughing.

"It's funny, Jeanne, I threw myself into the army. I was so sick
of being free and not getting anywhere. Now I have learnt that
life is to be used, not just held in the hand like a box of
bonbons that nobody eats."

She looked at him blankly.

"I mean, I don't think I get enough out of life," he said. "Let's
go."

They got to their feet.

"What do you mean?" she said slowly. "One takes what life gives,
that is all, there's no choice.... But look, there's the Malmaison
train.... We must run."

Giggling and breathless they climbed on the trailer, squeezing
themselves on the back platform where everyone was pushing and
exclaiming. The car began to joggle its way through Neuilly. Their
bodies were pressed together by the men and women about them.
Andrews put his arm firmly round Jeanne's waist and looked down at
her pale cheek that was pressed against his chest. Her little
round black straw hat with a bit of a red flower on it was just
under his chin.

"I can't see a thing," she gasped, still giggling.

"I'll describe the landscape," said Andrews. "Why, we are crossing
the Seine already."

"Oh, how pretty it must be!"

An old gentleman with a pointed white beard who stood beside them
laughed benevolently.

"But don't you think the Seine's pretty?" Jeanne looked up at him
impudently.

"Without a doubt, without a doubt.... It was the way you said it,"
said the old gentleman.... "You are going to St. Germain?" he
asked Andrews.

"No, to Malmaison."

"Oh, you should go to St. Germain. M. Reinach's prehistoric museum
is there. It is very beautiful. You should not go home to your
country without seeing it."

"Are there monkeys in it?" asked Jeanne.

"No," said the old gentleman turning away.

"I adore monkeys," said Jeanne.

The car was going along a broad empty boulevard with trees and
grass plots and rows of low store-houses and little dilapidated
rooming houses along either side. Many people had got out and
there was plenty of room, but Andrews kept his arm round the
girl's waist. The constant contact with her body made him feel
very languid.

"How good it smells!" said Jeanne.

"It's the spring."

"I want to lie on the grass and eat violets.... Oh, how good you
were to bring me out like this, Jean. You must know lots of fine
ladies you could have brought out, because you are so well
educated. How is it you are only an ordinary soldier?"

"Good God! I wouldn't be an officer."

"Why? It must be rather nice to be an officer."

"Does Etienne want to be an officer?"

"But he's a socialist, that's different."

"Well, I suppose I must be a socialist too, but let's talk of
something else."

Andrews moved over to the other side of the platform. They were
passing little villas with gardens on the road where yellow and
pale-purple crocuses bloomed. Now and then there was a scent of
violets in the moist air. The sun had disappeared under soft
purplish-grey clouds. There was occasionally a rainy chill in the
wind.

Andrews suddenly thought of Genevieve Rod. Curious how vividly he
remembered her face, her wide, open eyes and her way of smiling
without moving her firm lips. A feeling of annoyance went through
him. How silly of him to go off rudely like that! And he became
very anxious to talk to her again; things he wanted to say to her
came to his mind.

"Well, are you asleep?" said Jeanne tugging at his arm. "Here we
are."

Andrews flushed furiously.

"Oh, how nice it is here, how nice it is here!" Jeanne was saying.

"Why, it is eleven o'clock," said Andrews.

"We must see the palace before lunch," cried Jeanne, and she
started running up a lane of linden trees, where the fat buds were
just bursting into little crinkling fans of green. New grass was
sprouting in the wet ditches on either side. Andrews ran after
her, his feet pounding hard in the moist gravel road. When he
caught up to her he threw his arms round her recklessly and kissed
her panting mouth. She broke away from him and strode demurely
arranging her hat.

"Monster," she said, "I trimmed this hat specially to come out
with you and you do your best to wreck it."

"Poor little hat," said Andrews, "but it is so beautiful today,
and you are very lovely, Jeanne."

"The great Napoleon must have said that to the Empress Josephine
and you know what he did to her," said Jeanne almost solemnly.

"But she must have been awfully bored with him long before."

"No," said Jeanne, "that's how women are."

They  went  through  big  iron  gates   into  the  palace grounds.

Later they sat at a table in the garden of a little restaurant.
The sun, very pale, had just showed itself, making the knives and
forks and the white wine in their glasses gleam faintly. Lunch had
not come yet. They sat looking at each other silently. Andrews
felt weary and melancholy. He could think of nothing to say.
Jeanne was playing with some tiny white daisies with pink tips to
their petals, arranging them in circles and crosses on the table-
cloth.

"Aren't they slow?" said Andrews.

"But it's nice here, isn't it?" Jeanne smiled brilliantly. "But
how glum he looks now." She threw some daisies at him. Then, after
a pause, she added mockingly: "It's hunger, my dear. Good Lord,
how dependent men are on food!"

Andrews drank down his wine at a gulp. He felt that if he could
only make an effort he could lift off the stifling melancholy that
was settling down on him like a weight that kept growing heavier.

A man in khaki, with his face and neck scarlet, staggered into the
garden dragging beside him a mud-encrusted bicycle. He sank into
an iron chair, letting the bicycle fall with a clatter at his
feet.

"Hi, hi," he called in a hoarse voice.

A waiter appeared and contemplated him suspiciously. The man in
khaki had hair as red as his face, which was glistening with
sweat. His shirt was torn, and he had no coat. His breeches and
puttees were invisible for mud.

"Gimme a beer," croaked the man in khaki.

The waiter shrugged his shoulders and walked away.

"Il demande une biere," said Andrews.

"Mais Monsieur...."

"I'll pay. Get it for him."

The waiter disappeared.

"Thankee, Yank," roared the man in khaki.

The waiter brought a tall narrow yellow glass. The man in khaki
took it from his hand, drank it down at a draught and handed back
the empty glass. Then he spat, wiped his mouth on the back of his
hand, got with difficulty to his feet and shambled towards
Andrews's table.

"Oi presoom the loidy and you don't mind, Yank, if Oi parley wi'
yez a bit. Do yez?"

"No, come along; where did you come from?"

The man in khaki dragged an iron chair behind him to a spot near
the table. Before sitting down he bobbed his head in the direction
of Jeanne with an air of solemnity tugging at the same time at a
lock of his red hair. After some fumbling he got a red-bordered
handkerchief out of his pocket and wiped his face with it, leaving
a long black smudge of machine oil on his forehead.

"Oi'm a bearer of important secret messages, Yank," he said,
leaning back in the little iron chair. "Oi'm a despatch-rider."

"You look all in."

"Not a bit of it. Oi just had a little hold up, that's all, in a
woodland lane. Some buggers tried to do me in."

"What d'you mean?"

"Oi guess they had a little information...that's all. Oi'm
carryin' important messages from our headquarters in Rouen to your
president. Oi was goin' through a bloody thicket past this side.
Oi don't know how you pronounce the bloody town.... Oi was on my
bike making about thoity for the road was all a-murk when Oi saw
four buggers standing acrost the road...lookter me suspicious-
like, so Oi jus' jammed the juice into the boike and made for the
middle 'un. He dodged all right. Then they started shootin' and a
bloody bullet buggered the boike.... It was bein' born with a caul
that saved me.... Oi picked myself up outer the ditch an lost 'em
in the woods. Then Oi got to another bloody town and commandeered
this old sweatin' machine.... How many kills is there to Paris,
Yank?"

"Fifteen or sixteen, I think,"

"What's he saying, Jean?"

"Some men tried to stop him on the road. He's a despatch-rider."

"Isn't he ugly? Is he English?"

"Irish."

"You bet you, miss; Hirlanday; that's me.... You picked a good
looker this toime, Yank. But wait till Oi git to Paree. Oi clane
up a good hundre' pound on this job in bonuses. What part d'ye
come from, Yank?"

"Virginia. I live in New York."

"Oi been in Detroit; goin' back there to git in the
automoebile business soon as Oi clane up a few more bonuses.
Europe's dead an stinkin', Yank. Ain't no place for a young
fellow. It's dead an stinkin', that's what it is."

"It's pleasanter to live here than in America.... Say, d'you often
get held up that way?"

"Ain't happened to me before, but it has to pals o' moine."

"Who d'you think it was?

"Oi dunno; 'Unns or some of these bloody secret agents round the
Peace Conference.... But Oi got to go; that despatch won't keep."

"All right. The beer's on me."

"Thank ye, Yank." The man got to his feet, shook hands with
Andrews and Jeanne, jumped on the bicycle and rode out of the
garden to the road, threading his way through the iron chairs and
tables.

"Wasn't he a funny customer?" cried Andrews, laughing. "What a
wonderful joke things are!"

The waiter arrived with the omelette that began their lunch.

"Gives you an idea of how the old lava's bubbling in the volcano.
There's nowhere on earth a man can dance so well as on a volcano."

"But don't talk that way," said Jeanne laying down her knife and
fork. "It's terrible. We will waste our youth to no purpose. Our
fathers enjoyed themselves when they were young.... And if there
had been no war we should have been so happy, Etienne and I. My
father was a small manufacturer of soap and perfumery. Etienne
would have had a splendid situation. I should never have had to
work. We had a nice house. I should have been married...."

"But this way, Jeanne, haven't you more freedom?"

She shrugged her shoulders. Later she burst out: "But what's the
good of freedom? What can you do with it? What one wants is to
live well and have a beautiful house and be respected by people.
Oh, life was so sweet in France before the war."

"In that case it's not worth living," said Andrews in a savage
voice, holding himself in.

They went on eating silently. The sky became overcast. A few drops
splashed on the table-cloth.

"We'll have to take coffee inside," said Andrews.

"And you think it is funny that people shoot at a man on a
motorcycle going through a wood. All that seems to me terrible,
terrible," said Jeanne.

"Look out. Here comes the rain!"

They ran into the restaurant through the first hissing sheet of
the shower and sat at a table near a window watching the rain
drops dance and flicker on the green iron tables. A scent of wet
earth and the mushroom-like odor of sodden leaves came in borne on
damp gusts through the open door. A waiter closed the glass doors
and bolted them.

"He wants to keep out the spring. He can't," said Andrews.

They smiled at each other over their coffee cups. They were  in
sympathy again.

When the rain stopped they walked across wet fields by a foot path
full of little clear puddles that reflected the blue sky and the
white-and amber-tinged clouds where the shadows were light
purplish-grey. They walked slowly arm in arm, pressing their
bodies together. They were very tired, they did not know why and
stopped often to rest leaning against the damp boles of trees.
Beside a pond pale blue and amber and silver from the reflected
sky, they  found under a big beech tree a patch of wild violets,
which Jeanne picked greedily, mixing them with the little crimson-
tipped daisies in the tight bouquet. At the suburban railway
station, they sat silent, side by side on a bench, sniffing the
flowers now and then, so sunk in languid weariness that they could
hardly summon strength to climb into a seat on top of a third
class coach, which was crowded with people coming home from a day
in the country. Everybody had violets and crocuses and twigs with
buds on them. In people's stiff, citified clothes lingered a smell
of wet fields and sprouting woods. All the girls shrieked and
threw their arms round the men when the train went through a
tunnel or under a bridge. Whatever happened, everybody laughed.
When the train arrived in the station, it was almost with
reluctance that they left it, as if they felt that from that
moment their work-a-day lives began again. Andrews and Jeanne
walked down the platform without touching each other. Their
fingers were stained and sticky from touching buds and crushing
young sappy leaves and grass stalks. The air of the city seemed
dense and unbreathable after the scented moisture of the fields.

They dined at a little restaurant on the Quai Voltaire and
afterwards walked slowly towards the Place St. Michel, feeling the
wine and the warmth of the food sending new vigor into their tired
bodies. Andrews had his arm round her shoulder and they talked in
low intimate voices, hardly moving their lips, looking long at the
men and women they saw sitting twined in each other's arms on
benches, at the couples of boys and girls that kept passing them,
talking slowly and quietly, as they were, bodies pressed together
as theirs were.

"How many lovers there are," said Andrews.

"Are we lovers?" asked Jeanne with a curious little laugh.

"I wonder.... Have you ever been crazily in love, Jeanne?"

"I don't know. There was a boy in Laon named Marcelin. But I was a
little fool then. The last news of him was from Verdun."

"Have you had many...like I am?"

"How sentimental we are," she cried laughing.

"No. I wanted to know. I know so little of life," said
Andrews.

"I have amused myself, as best I could," said Jeanne in a serious
tone. "But I am not frivolous.... There have been very few men I
have liked.... So I have had few friends...do you want to call
them lovers? But lovers are what married women have on the
stage.... All that sort of thing is very silly."

"Not so very long ago," said Andrews, "I used to dream
of being romantically in love, with people climbing up the
ivy on castle walls, and fiery kisses on balconies in the
moonlight."

"Like at the Opera Comique," cried Jeanne laughing.

"That was all very silly. But even now, I want so much more of
life than life can give."

They leaned over the parapet and listened to the hurrying swish of
the river, now soft and now loud, where the reflections of the
lights on the opposite bank writhed like golden snakes.

Andrews noticed that there was someone beside them. The faint,
greenish glow from the lamp on the quai enabled him to recognize
the lame boy he had talked to months ago on the Butte.

"I wonder if you'll remember me," he said.

"You are the American who was in the Restaurant, Place du Terte, I
don't remember when, but it was long ago."

They shook hands.

"But you are alone," said Andrews.

"Yes, I am always alone," said the lame boy firmly. He held out
his hand again.

"Au revoir," said Andrews.

"Good luck!" said the lame boy. Andrews heard his crutch tapping
on the pavement as he went away along the quai.

"Jeanne," said Andrews, suddenly, "you'll come home with me, won't
you?"

"But you have a friend living with you."

"He's gone to Brussels. He won't be back till tomorrow."

"I suppose one must pay for one's dinner," said Jeanne
maliciously.

"Good God, no." Andrews buried his face in his hands. The singsong
of the river pouring through the bridges, filled his ears. He
wanted desperately to cry. Bitter desire that was like hatred made
his flesh tingle, made his hands ache to crush her hands in them.

"Come along," he said gruffly.

"I didn't mean to say that," she said in a gentle, tired voice.
"You know, I'm not a very nice person." The greenish glow of the
lamp lit up the contour of one of her cheeks as she tilted her
head up, and glimmered in her eyes. A soft sentimental sadness
suddenly took hold of Andrews; he felt as he used to feel when, as
a very small child, his mother used to tell him Br' Rabbit
stories, and he would feel himself drifting helplessly on the
stream of her soft voice, narrating, drifting towards something
unknown and very sad, which he could not help.

They started walking again, past the Pont Neuf, towards the glare
of the Place St. Michel. Three names had come into Andrews's head,
"Arsinoe, Berenike, Artemisia." For a little while he puzzled over
them, and then he remembered that Genevieve Rod had the large eyes
and the wide, smooth forehead and the firm little lips the women
had in the portraits that were sewn on the mummy cases in the
Fayum. But those patrician women of Alexandria had not had
chestnut hair with a glimpse of burnished copper in it; they might
have dyed it, though!

"Why are you laughing?" asked Jeanne.

"Because things are so silly."

"Perhaps you mean people are silly," she said, looking up at him
out of the corners of her eyes.

"You're right."

They walked in silence till they reached Andrews's door.

"You go up first and see that there's no one there," said Jeanne
in a business-like tone.

Andrews's hands were cold. He felt his heart thumping while he
climbed the stairs.

The room was empty. A fire was ready to light in the small
fireplace. Andrews hastily tidied up the table and kicked under
the bed some soiled clothes that lay in a heap in a corner. A
thought came to him: how like his performances in his room at
college when he had heard that a relative was coming to see him.

He tiptoed downstairs.

"Bien. Tu peux venir, Jeanne," he said.

She sat down rather stiffly in the straight-backed armchair beside
the fire.

"How pretty the fire is," she said.

"Jeanne, I think I'm crazily in love with you," said Andrews in an
excited voice.

"Like at the Opera Comique." She shrugged her shoulders. "The
room's nice," she said. "Oh, but, what a big bed!"

"You're the first woman who's been up here in my time,
Jeanne.... Oh, but this uniform is frightful."

Andrews thought suddenly of all the tingling bodies constrained
into the rigid attitudes of automatons in uniforms like this one;
of all the hideous farce of making men into machines. Oh, if some
gesture of his could only free them all for life and freedom and
joy. The thought drowned everything else for the moment.

"But you pulled a button off," cried Jeanne laughing hysterically.
"I'll just have to sew it on again."

"Never mind. If you knew how I hated them."

"What white skin you have, like a woman's. I suppose that's
because you are blond," said Jeanne.



The sound of the door being shaken vigorously woke Andrews. He got
up and stood in the middle of the floor for a moment without being
able to collect his wits. The shaking of the door continued, and
he heard Walters's voice crying "Andy, Andy." Andrews felt shame
creeping up through him like nausea. He felt a passionate disgust
towards himself and Jeanne and Walters. He had an impulse to move
furtively as if he had stolen something. He went to the door and
opened it a little.

"Say, Walters, old man," he said, "I can't let you in.... I've got
a girl with me. I'm sorry.... I thought you wouldn't get back till
tomorrow."

"You're kidding, aren't you?" came Walters's voice out of the dark
hall.

"No." Andrews shut the door decisively and bolted it again.

Jeanne was still asleep. Her black hair had come undone and spread
over the pillow. Andrews pulled the covers up about her carefully.

Then he got into the other bed, where he lay awake a long time,
staring at the ceiling.



                                                IV

People walking along the boulevard looked curiously through the
railing at the line of men in olive-drab that straggled round the
edge of the courtyard. The line moved slowly, past a table where
an officer and two enlisted men sat poring over big lists of names
and piles of palely tinted banknotes and silver francs that
glittered white. Above the men's heads a thin haze of cigarette
smoke rose into the sunlight. There was a sound of voices and of
feet shuffling on the gravel. The men who had been paid went off
jauntily, the money jingling in their pockets.

The men at the table had red faces and tense, serious expressions.
They pushed the money into the soldiers' hands with a rough jerk
and pronounced the names as if they were machines clicking.

Andrews saw that one of the men at the table was Walters; he
smiled and whispered "Hello" as he came up to him. Walters kept
his eyes fixed on the list.

While Andrews was waiting for the man ahead of him to be paid, he
heard two men in the line talking.

"Wasn't that a hell of a place? D'you remember the lad that died
in the barracks one day?"

"Sure, I was in the medicks there too. There was a hell of a
sergeant in that company tried to make the kid get up, and the
loot came and said he'd court-martial him, an' then they found out
that he'd cashed in his checks."

"What'd 'ee die of?"

"Heart failure, I guess. I dunno, though, he never did take to the
life."

"No. That place Cosne was enough to make any guy cash in his
checks."

Andrews got his money. As he was walking away, he strolled up to
the two men he had heard talking.

"Were you fellows in Cosne?"

"Sure."

"Did you know a fellow named Fuselli?"

"I dunno...."

"Sure, you do," said the other man. "You remember Dan Fuselli, the
little wop thought he was goin' to be corporal."

"He had another think comin'." They both laughed.

Andrews walked off, vaguely angry. There were many soldiers on the
Boulevard Montparnasse. He turned into a side street, feeling
suddenly furtive and humble, as if he would hear any minute the
harsh voice of a sergeant shouting orders at him.

The silver in his breeches pocket jingled with every step.



Andrews leaned on the balustrade of the balcony, looking down into
the square in front of the Opera Comique. He was dizzy with the
beauty of the music he had been hearing. He had a sense somewhere
in the distances of his mind of the great rhythm of the sea.
People chattered all about him on the wide, crowded balcony, but
he was only conscious of the blue-grey mistiness of the night
where the lights made patterns in green-gold and red-gold. And
compelling his attention from everything else, the rhythm swept
through him like sea waves.

"I thought you'd be here," said Genevieve Rod in a quiet voice
beside him.

Andrews felt strangely tongue-tied.

"It's nice to see you," he blurted out, after looking at her
silently for a moment.

"Of course you love Pelleas."

"It is the first time I've heard it."

"Why haven't you been to see us? It's two weeks.... We've been
expecting you."

"I didn't know...Oh,  I'll certainly come. I don't know anyone at
present I can talk music to."

"You know me."

"Anyone else, I should have said."

"Are you working?"

"Yes.... But this hinders frightfully." Andrews yanked at the
front of his tunic. "Still, I expect to be free very soon. I'm
putting in an application for discharge."

"I suppose you will feel you can do so much better.... You will be
much stronger now that you have done your duty."

"No...by no means."

"Tell me, what was that you played at our house?"

"'The Three Green Riders on Wild Asses,'" said Andrews smiling.

"What do you mean?"

"It's a prelude to the 'Queen of Sheba,'" said Andrews. "If you
didn't think the same as M. Emile Faguet and everyone else about
St. Antoine, I'd tell you what I mean."

"That was very silly of me.... But if you pick up all the silly
things people say accidentally...well, you must be angry most of
the time."

In the dim light he could not see her eyes. There was a little
glow on the curve of her cheek coming from under the dark of her
hat to her rather pointed chin. Behind it he could see other faces
of men and women crowded on the balcony talking, lit up crudely by
the gold glare that came out through the French windows from the
lobby.

"I have always been tremendously fascinated by the place in La
Tentation where the Queen of Sheba visited Antoine, that's all,"
said Andrews gruffly.

"Is that the first thing you've done? It made me think a little of
Borodine."

"The first that's at all pretentious. It's probably just a steal
from everything I've ever heard."

"No, it's good. I suppose you had it in your head all through
those dreadful and glorious days at the front.... Is it for piano
or orchestra?"

"All that's finished is for piano. I hope to orchestrate it
eventually.... Oh, but it's really silly to talk this way. I don't
know enough.... I need years of hard work before I can do
anything.... And I have wasted so much time.... That is the most
frightful thing. One has so few years of youth!"

"There's the bell, we must scuttle back to our seats. Till the
next intermission." She slipped through the glass doors and
disappeared. Andrews went back to his seat very excited, full of
unquiet exultation. The first strains of the orchestra were pain,
he felt them so acutely.

After the last act they walked in silence down a dark street,
hurrying to get away from the crowds of the Boulevards.

When they reached the Avenue de l'Opera, she said: "Did you say
you were going to stay in France?"

"Yes, indeed, if I can. I am going tomorrow to put in an
application for discharge in France."

"What will you do then?"

"I shall have to find a job of some sort that will let me study at
the Schola Cantorum. But I have enough money to last a little
while."

"You are courageous."

"I forgot to ask you if you would rather take the Metro."

"No; let's walk."

They went under the arch of the Louvre. The air was full of a fine
wet mist, so that every street lamp was surrounded by a blur of
light.

"My blood is full of the music of Debussy," said Genevieve Rod,
spreading out her arms.

"It's no use trying to say what one feels about it. Words aren't
much good, anyway, are they?"

"That depends."

They walked silently along the quais. The mist was so thick they
could not see the Seine, but whenever they came near a bridge they
could hear the water rustling through the arches.

"France is stifling," said Andrews, all of a sudden. "It stifles
you very slowly, with beautiful silk bands.... America beats your
brains out with a policeman's billy."

"What do you mean?" she asked, letting pique chill her voice.

"You know so much in France. You have made the world so neat...."

"But you seem to want to stay here," she said with a laugh.

"It's that there's nowhere else. There is nowhere except Paris
where one can find out things about music, particularly.... But I
am one of those people who was not made to be contented."

"Only sheep are contented."

"I think I have been happier this month in Paris than ever before
in my life. It seems six, so much has happened in it."

"Poissac is where I am happiest."

"Where is that?"

"We have a country house there, very old and very tumbledown. They
say that Rabelais used to come to the village. But our house is
from later, from the time of Henri Quatre. Poissac is not far from
Tours. An ugly name, isn't it? But to me it is very beautiful. The
house has orchards all round it, and yellow roses with flushed
centers poke themselves in my window, and there is a little tower
like Montaigne's."

"When I get out of the army, I shall go somewhere in the country
and work and work."

"Music should be made in the country, when the sap is rising in
the trees."

"'D'apres nature,' as the rabbit man said."

"Who's the rabbit man?"

"A very pleasant person," said Andrews, bubbling with laughter.
"You shall meet him some day. He sells little stuffed rabbits that
jump, outside the Cafe de Rohan."

"Here we are.... Thank you for coming home with me."

"But how soon. Are you sure it is the house? We can't have got
there as soon as this."

"Yes, it's my house," said Genevieve Rod laughing. She held out
her hand to him and he shook it eagerly. The latchkey clicked in
the door.

"Why don't you have a cup of tea with us here tomorrow?" she said.

"With pleasure."

The big varnished door with its knocker in the shape of a ring
closed behind her. Andrews walked away with a light step, feeling
jolly and exhilarated.

As he walked down the mist-filled quai towards the Place St.
Michel, his ears were filled with the lisping gurgle of the river
past the piers of the bridges.

Walters was asleep. On the table in his room was a card from
Jeanne. Andrews read the card holding it close to the candle.

"How long it is since I saw you!" it read. "I shall pass the Cafe
de Rohan Wednesday at seven, along the pavement opposite the
Magazin du Louvre."

It was a card of Malmaison.

Andrews flushed. Bitter melancholy throbbed through him. He walked
languidly to the window and looked out into the dark court. A
window below his spilled a warm golden haze into the misty night,
through which he could make out vaguely some pots of ferns
standing on the wet flagstones. From somewhere came a dense smell
of hyacinths. Fragments of thought slipped one after another
through his mind. He thought of himself washing windows long ago
at training camp, and remembered the way the gritty sponge scraped
his hands. He could not help feeling shame when he thought of
those days. "Well, that's all over now," he told himself. He
wondered, in a half-irritated way, about Genevieve Rod. What sort
of a person was she? Her face, with its wide eyes and pointed chin
and the reddish-chestnut hair, unpretentiously coiled above the
white forehead, was very vivid in his mind, though when he tried
to remember what it was like in profile, he could not. She had
thin hands, with long fingers that ought to play the piano well.
When she grew old would she be yellow-toothed and jolly, like her
mother? He could not think of her old; she was too vigorous; there
was too much malice in her passionately-restrained gestures. The
memory of her faded, and there came to his mind Jeanne's
overworked little hands, with callous places, and the tips of the
fingers grimy and scarred from needlework. But the smell of
hyacinths that came up from the mist-filled courtyard was like a
sponge wiping all impressions from his brain. The dense sweet
smell in the damp air made him feel languid and melancholy.

He took off his clothes slowly and got into bed. The smell of the
hyacinths came to him very faintly, so that he did not know
whether or not he was imagining it.



The major's office was a large white-painted room, with elaborate
mouldings and mirrors in all four walls, so that while Andrews
waited, cap in hand, to go up to the desk, he could see the small
round major with his pink face and bald head repeated to infinity
in two directions in the grey brilliance of the mirrors.

"What do you want?" said the major, looking up from some papers he
was signing.

Andrews stepped up to the desk. On both sides of the room a skinny
figure in olive-drab, repeated endlessly, stepped up to endless
mahogany desks, which faded into each other in an endless dusty
perspective.

"Would you mind O.K.-ing this application for discharge, Major?"

"How many dependents?" muttered the major through his teeth,
poring over the application.

"None. It's for discharge in France to study music."

"Won't do. You need an affidavit that you can support yourself,
that you have enough money to continue your studies. You want to
study music, eh? D'you think you've got talent? Needs a very great
deal of talent to study music."

"Yes, sir.... But is there anything else I need except the
affidavit?"

"No.... It'll go through in short order. We're glad to release
men.... We're glad to release any man with a good military
record.... Williams!"

"Yes, sir."

A sergeant came over from a small table by the door.

"Show this man what he needs to do to get discharged in France."

Andrews saluted. Out of the corner of his eye he saw the figures
in the mirror, saluting down an endless corridor.

When he got out on the street in front of the great white building
where the major's office was, a morose feeling of helplessness
came over him. There were many automobiles of different sizes and
shapes, limousines, runabouts, touring cars, lined up along the
curb, all painted olive-drab and neatly stenciled with numbers in
white. Now and then a personage came out of the white marble
building, puttees and Sam Browne belt gleaming, and darted into an
automobile, or a noisy motorcycle stopped with a jerk in front of
the wide door to let out an officer in goggles and mud-splattered
trench coat, who disappeared immediately through revolving doors.
Andrews could  imagine him striding along halls, where from every
door came an imperious clicking of typewriters, where papers were
piled high on yellow varnished desks, where sallow-faced clerks in
uniform loafed in rooms, where the four walls were covered from
floor to ceiling with card catalogues. And every day they were
adding to the paper, piling up more little drawers with index
cards. It seemed to Andrews that the shiny white marble building
would have to burst with all the paper stored up within it, and
would flood the broad avenue with avalanches of index cards.

"Button yer coat," snarled a voice in his ear.

Andrews looked up suddenly. An M. P. with a raw-looking face in
which was a long sharp nose, had come up to him.

Andrews buttoned up his overcoat and said nothing.

"Ye can't hang around here this way," the M. P. called after him.

Andrews flushed and walked away without turning his head. He was
stinging with humiliation; an angry voice inside him kept telling
him that he was a coward, that he should make some futile gesture
of protest. Grotesque pictures of revolt flamed through his mind,
until he remembered that when he was very small, the same tumul-
tuous pride had seethed and ached in him whenever he had been
reproved by an older person. Helpless despair fluttered about
within him like a bird beating against the wires of a cage. Was
there no outlet, no gesture of expression, would he have to go on
this way day after day, swallowing the bitter gall of indignation,
that every new symbol of his slavery brought to his lips?

He was walking in an agitated way across the Jardin des Tuileries,
full of little children and women with dogs on leashes and
nursemaids with starched white caps, when he met Genevieve Rod and
her mother. Genevieve was dressed in pearl grey, with an elegance
a little too fashionable to please Andrews. Mme. Rod wore black.
In front of them a black and tan terrier ran from one side to the
other, on nervous little legs that trembled like steel springs.

"Isn't it lovely this morning?" cried Genevieve.

"I didn't know you had a dog."

"Oh, we never go out without Santo, a protection to two lone
women, you know," said Mme. Rod, laughing. "Viens, Santo, dis
bonjour au Monsieur."

"He usually lives at Poissac," said Genevieve.

The little dog barked furiously at Andrews, a shrill bark like a
child squalling.

"He knows he ought to be suspicious of soldiers.... I imagine most
soldiers would change with him if they had a chance.... Viens
Santo, viens Santo.... Will you change lives with me, Santo?"

"You look as if you'd been quarrelling with somebody," said
Genevieve Rod lightly.

"I have, with myself.... I'm going to write a book on slave
psychology. It would be very amusing," said Andrews in a gruff,
breathless voice.

"But we must hurry, dear, or we'll be late to the tailor's," said
Mme. Rod. She held out her black-gloved hand to Andrews.

"We'll be in at tea time this afternoon. You might play me some
more of the 'Queen of Sheba,'" said Genevieve.

"I'm afraid I shan't be able to, but you never can tell.... Thank
you."

He was relieved to have left them. He had been afraid he would
burst out into some childish tirade. What a shame old Henslowe
hadn't come back yet. He could have poured out all his despair to
him; he had often enough before; and Henslowe was out of the army
now. Wearily Andrews decided that he would have to start scheming
and intriguing again as he had schemed and intrigued to come to
Paris in the first place. He thought of the white marble
building and the officers with shiny puttees going in and out, and
the typewriters clicking in every room, and the understanding of
his helplessness before all that complication made him shiver.

An idea came to him. He ran down the steps of a metro station.
Aubrey would know someone at the Crillon who could help him.

But when the train reached the Concorde station, he could not
summon the will power to get out. He felt a harsh repugnance to
any effort. What was the use of humiliating himself and begging
favors of people? It was hopeless anyway. In a fierce burst of
pride a voice inside of him was shouting that he, John Andrews,
should have no shame, that he should force people to do things for
him, that he, who lived more acutely than the rest, suffering more
pain and more joy, who had the power to express his pain and his
joy so that it would impose itself on others, should force his
will on those around him. "More of the psychology of slavery,"
said Andrews to himself, suddenly smashing the soap-bubble of his
egoism.

The train had reached the Porte Maillot.

Andrews stood in the sunny boulevard in front of the metro
station, where the plane trees were showing tiny gold-brown
leaves, sniffing the smell of a flower-stall in front of which a
woman stood, with a deft abstracted gesture tying up bunch after
bunch of violets. He felt a desire to be out in the country, to be
away from houses and people. There was a line of men and women
buying tickets for St. Germain; still indecisive, he joined it,
and at last, almost without intending it, found himself jolting
through Neuilly in the green trailer of the electric car, that
waggled like a duck's tail when the car went fast.

He remembered his last trip on that same car with Jeanne, and
wished mournfully that he might have fallen in love with her, that
he might have forgotten himself and the army and everything in
crazy, romantic love.

When he got off the car at St. Germain, he had stopped formulating
his thoughts; soggy despair throbbed in him like an infected
wound.

He sat for a while at the cafe opposite the Chateau looking at the
light red walls and the strong stone-bordered windows and the
jaunty turrets and chimneys that rose above the classic balustrade
with its big urns on the edge of the roof. The park, through the
tall iron railings, was full of russet and pale lines, all mist of
new leaves. Had they really lived more vividly, the people of the
Renaissance? Andrews could almost see men with plumed hats and
short cloaks and elaborate brocaded tunics swaggering with a hand
at the sword hilt, about the quiet square in front of the gate of
the Chateau. And he thought of the great, sudden wind of freedom
that had blown out of Italy, before which dogmas and slaveries had
crumbled to dust. In contrast, the world today seemed pitifully
arid. Men seemed to have shrunk in stature before the vastness of
the mechanical contrivances they had invented. Michael Angelo, da
Vinci, Aretino, Cellini; would the strong figures of men ever so
dominate the world again? Today everything was congestion, the
scurrying of crowds; men had become ant-like. Perhaps it was
inevitable that the crowds should sink deeper and deeper in
slavery. Whichever won, tyranny from above, or spontaneous
organization from below, there could be no individuals.

He went through the gates into the park, laid out with a few
flower beds where pansies bloomed; through the dark ranks of elm
trunks, was brilliant sky, with here and there a moss-green statue
standing out against it. At the head of an alley he came out on a
terrace. Beyond the strong curves of the pattern of the iron
balustrade was an expanse of country, pale green, falling to blue
towards the horizon, patched with pink and slate-colored houses
and carved with railway tracks. At his feet the Seine shone like a
curved sword blade.

He walked with long strides along the terrace, and followed a road
that turned into the forest, forgetting the monotonous tread mill
of his thoughts, in the flush that the fast walking sent through
his whole body, in the rustling silence of the woods, where the
moss on the north side of the boles of the trees was emerald, and
where the sky was soft grey through a lavender lacework of
branches. The green gnarled woods made him think of the first act
of Pelleas. With his tunic unbuttoned and his shirt open at the
neck and his hands stuck deep in his pockets, he went along
whistling like a school boy.

After an hour he came out of the woods on a highroad, where he
found himself walking beside a two-wheeled cart, that kept pace
with him exactly, try as he would to get ahead of it. After a
while, a boy leaned out:

"Hey, l'Americain, vous voulez monter?"

"Where are you going?"

"Conflans-Ste.-Honorine."

"Where's that?"

The boy flourished his whip vaguely towards the horse's head.

"All right," said Andrews.

"These are potatoes," said the boy, "make yourself comfortable.''
Andrews offered him a cigarette, which he took with muddy fingers.
He had a broad face, red cheeks and chunky features. Reddish-brown
hair escaped spikily from under a mud-spattered beret.

"Where did you say you were going?"

"Conflans-Ste.-Honorine. Silly all these saints, aren't they?"

Andrews laughed.

"Where are you going?" the boy asked.

"I don't know. I was taking a walk."

The boy leaned over to Andrews and whispered in his car:
"Deserter?"

"No.... I had a day off and wanted to see the country."

"I just thought, if you were a deserter, I might be able to help
you. Must be silly to be a soldier. Dirty life.... But you like
the country. So do I. You can't call this country. I'm not from
this part; I'm from Brittany. There we have real country. It's
stifling near Paris here, so many people, so many houses."

"It seems mighty fine to me."

"That's because you're a soldier, better than barracks, hein?
Dirty life that. I'll never be a soldier. I'm going into the navy.
Merchant marine, and then if I have to do service I'll do it on
the sea."

"I suppose it is pleasanter."

"There's more freedom. And the sea.... We Bretons, you know, we
all die of the sea or of liquor."

They laughed.

"Have you been long in this part of the country?" asked Andrews.

"Six months. It's very dull, this farming work. I'm head of a gang
in a fruit orchard, but not for long. I have a brother shipped on
a sailing vessel. When he comes back to Bordeaux, I'll ship on the
same boat."

"Where to?"

"South America, Peru; how should I know?"

"I'd like to ship on a sailing vessel," said Andrews.

"You would? It seems very fine to me to travel, and see new
countries. And perhaps I shall stay over there."

"Where?"

"How should I know? If I like it, that is.... Life is very bad in
Europe."

"It is stifling, I suppose," said Andrews slowly, "all these
nations, all these hatreds, but still...it is very beautiful. Life
is very ugly in America."

"Let's have something to drink. There's a bistro!"

The boy jumped down from the cart and tied the horse to a tree.
They went into a small wine shop with a counter and one square oak
table.

"But won't you be late?" said Andrews.

"I don't care. I like talking, don't you?"

"Yes, indeed."

They ordered wine of an old woman in a green apron, who had three
yellow teeth that protruded from her mouth when she spoke.

"I haven't had anything to eat," said Andrews.

"Wait a minute." The boy ran out to the cart and came back with a
canvas bag, from which he took half a loaf of bread and some
cheese.

"My name's Marcel," the boy said when they had sat for a while
sipping wine.

"Mine is Jean...Jean Andre."

"I have a brother named Jean, and my father's name is Andre.
That's pleasant, isn't it?"

"But it must be a splendid job, working in a fruit orchard," said
Andrews, munching bread and cheese.

"It's well paid; but you get tired of being in one place all the
time. It's not as it is in Brittany...." Marcel paused. He sat,
rocking a little on the stool, holding on to the seat between his
legs. A curious brilliance came into his grey eyes. "There," he
went on in a soft voice, "it is so quiet in the fields, and from
every hill you look at the sea.... I like that, don't you?" he
turned to Andrews, with a smile.

"You are lucky to be free," said Andrews bitterly. He felt as if
he would burst into tears.

"But you will be demobilized soon; the butchery is over. You will
go home to your family. That will be good, hein?"

"I wonder. It's not far enough away. Restless!"

"What do you expect?"

A fine rain was falling. They climbed in on the potato sacks and
the horse started a jog trot; its lanky brown shanks glistened a
little from the rain.

"Do you come out this way often?" asked Marcel.

"I shall. It's the nicest place near Paris."

"Some Sunday you must come and I'll take you round. The Castle is
very fine. And then there is Malmaison, where the great Emperor
lived with the Empress Josephine."

Andrews suddenly remembered Jeanne's card. This was Wednesday. He
pictured her dark figure among the crowd of the pavement in front
of the Cafe de Rohan. Of course it had to be that way. Despair, so
helpless as to be almost sweet, came over him.

"And girls," he said suddenly to Marcel, "are they pretty round
here?"

Marcel shrugged his shoulders.

"It's not women that we lack, if a fellow has money," he said.

Andrews felt a sense of shame, he did not exactly know why.

"My brother writes that in South America the women are very brown
and very passionate," added Marcel with a wistful smile. "But
travelling and reading books, that's what I like.... But look, if
you want to take the train back to Paris...." Marcel pulled up the
horse to a standstill. "If you want to take the train, cross that
field by the foot path and keep right along the road to the left
till you come to the river. There's a ferryman. The town's
Herblay, and there's a station.... And any Sunday before noon I'll
be at 3 rue des Eveques, Reuil. You must come and we'll take a
walk together."

They shook hands, and Andrews strode off across the wet fields.
Something strangely sweet and wistful that he could not analyse
lingered in his mind from Marcel's talk. Somewhere, beyond
everything, he was conscious of the great free rhythm of the sea.

Then he thought of the Major's office that morning, and of his own
skinny figure in the mirrors, repeated endlessly, standing
helpless and humble before the shining mahogany desk. Even out
here in these fields where the wet earth seemed to heave with the
sprouting of new growth, he was not free. In those office
buildings, with white marble halls full of the clank of officers'
heels, in index cards and piles of typewritten papers, his real
self, which they had power to kill if they wanted to, was in his
name and his number, on lists with millions of other names and
other numbers. This sentient body of his, full of possibilities
and hopes and desires, was only a pale ghost that depended on the
other self, that suffered for it and cringed for it. He could not
drive out of his head the picture of himself, skinny, in an ill-
fitting uniform, repeated endlessly in the two mirrors of the
Major's white-painted office.

All of a sudden, through bare poplar trees, he saw the Seine.

He hurried along the road, splashing now and then in a shining
puddle, until he came to a landing place. The river was very wide,
silvery, streaked with pale-green and violet, and straw-color from
the evening sky. Opposite were bare poplars and behind them
clusters of buff-colored houses climbing up a green hill to a
church, all repeated upside down in the color-streaked river. The
river was very full, and welled up above its banks, the way the
water stands up above the rim of a glass filled too full. From the
water came an indefinable rustling, flowing sound that rose and
fell with quiet rhythm in Andrews's ears.

Andrews forgot everything in the great wave of music that rose
impetuously through him, poured with the hot blood through his
veins, with the streaked colors of the river and the sky through
his eyes, with the rhythm of the flowing river through his ears.



                              V

"So I came without," said Andrews, laughing.

"What fun!" cried Genevieve. "But anyway they couldn't do anything
to you. Chartres is so near. It's at the gates of Paris."

They were alone in the compartment. The train had pulled out of
the station and was going through suburbs where the trees were in
leaf in the gardens, and fruit trees foamed above the red brick
walls, among the box-like villas.

"Anyway," said Andrews, "it was an opportunity not to be missed."

"That must be one of the most amusing things about being a
soldier, avoiding regulations. I wonder whether Damocles didn't
really enjoy his sword, don't you think so?"

They laughed.

"But mother was very doubtful about my coming with you this way.
She's such a dear, she wants to be very modern and liberal, but
she always gets frightened at the last minute. And my aunt will
think the world's end has come when we appear."

They went through some tunnels, and when the train stopped at
Sevres, had a glimpse of the Seine valley, where the blue mist
made a patina over the soft pea-green of new leaves. Then the
train came out on wide plains, full of the glaucous shimmer of
young oats and the golden-green of fresh-sprinkled wheat fields,
where the mist on the horizon was purplish. The train's shadow,
blue, sped along beside them over the grass and fences.

"How beautiful it is to go out of the city this way in the early
morning!... Has your aunt a piano?"

"Yes, a very old and tinkly one."

"It would be amusing to play you all I have done at the 'Queen of
Sheba.' You say the most helpful things."

"It is that I am interested. I think you will do something some
day."

Andrews shrugged his shoulders.

They sat silent, their ears filled up by the jerking rhythm  of
wheels over rails, now and then looking at each other, almost
furtively. Outside, fields and hedges and patches of blossom, and
poplar trees faintly powdered with green, unrolled, like a scroll
before them, behind the nicker of telegraph poles and the
festooned wires on which the sun gave glints of red copper.
Andrews discovered all at once that the coppery glint on the
telegraph wires was the same as the glint in Genevieve's hair.
"Berenike, Artemisia, Arsinoe," the names lingered in his mind. So
that as he looked out of the window at the long curves of the
telegraph wires that seemed to rise and fall as they glided past,
he could imagine her face, with its large, pale brown eyes and its
small mouth and broad smooth forehead, suddenly stilled into the
encaustic painting on the mummy case of some Alexandrian girl.

"Tell me,"  she said,  "when did you begin to write music?"

Andrews brushed the light, disordered hair off his forehead.

"Why, I think I forgot to brush my hair this morning," he said.
"You see, I was so excited by the idea of coming to Chartres with
you."

They laughed.

"But my mother taught me to play the piano when I was very small,"
he went on seriously. "She and I lived alone in an old house
belonging to her family in Virginia. How different all that was
from anything you have ever lived. It would not be possible in
Europe to be as isolated as we were in Virginia.... Mother was
very unhappy. She had led a dreadfully thwarted life...that unre-
lieved hopeless misery that only a woman can suffer. She used to
tell me stories, and I used to make up little tunes about them,
and about anything. The great success," he laughed, "was, I
remember, to a dandelion.... I can remember so well the way Mother
pursed up her lips as she leaned over the writing desk.... She was
very tall, and as it was dark in our old sitting room, had to lean
far over to see.... She used to spend hours making beautiful
copies of tunes I made up. My mother is the only person who has
ever really had any importance in my life.... But I lack technical
training terribly."

"Do you think it is so important?" said Genevieve, leaning towards
him to make herself heard above the clatter of the train.

"Perhaps it isn't. I don't know."

"I think it always comes sooner or later, if you feel intensely
enough."

"But it is so frightful to feel all you want to express getting
away beyond you. An idea comes into your head, and you feel it
grow stronger and stronger and you can't grasp it; you have no
means to express it. It's like standing on a street corner and
seeing a gorgeous procession go by without being able to join it,
or like opening a bottle of beer and having it foam all over you
without having a glass to pour it into."

Genevieve burst out laughing.

"But you can drink from the bottle, can't you?" she said, her eyes
sparkling.

"I'm trying to," said Andrews.

"Here we are. There's the cathedral. No, it's hidden," cried
Genevieve.

They got to their feet. As they left the station, Andrews said:
"But after all, it's only freedom that matters. When I'm out of
the army!..."

"Yes, I suppose you are right...for you that is. The artist should
be free from any sort of entanglement."

"I don't see what difference there is between an artist and any
other sort of workman," said Andrews savagely.

"No, but look."

From the square where they stood, above the green blur of a little
park, they could see the cathedral, creamy yellow and rust color,
with the sober tower and the gaudy tower, and the great rose
window between, the whole pile standing nonchalantly, knee deep in
the packed roofs of the town.

They stood shoulder to shoulder, looking at it without
speaking.

In the afternoon they walked down the hill towards the river, that
flowed through a quarter of tottering, peak-gabled houses and
mills, from which came a sound of grinding wheels. Above them,
towering over gardens full of pear trees in bloom, the apse of the
cathedral bulged against the pale sky. On a narrow and very
ancient bridge they stopped and looked at the water, full of a
shimmer of blue and green and grey from the sky and from the vivid
new leaves of the willow trees along the bank.

Their senses glutted with the beauty of the day and the intricate
magnificence of the cathedral, languid with all they had seen and
said, they were talking of the future with quiet voices.

"It's all in forming a habit of work," Andrews was saying. "You
have to be a slave to get anything done. It's all a question of
choosing your master, don't you think so?"

"Yes. I suppose all the men who have left their imprint on
people's lives have been slaves in a sense," said Genevieve
slowly. "Everyone has to give up a great deal of life to live
anything deeply. But it's worth, it." She looked Andrews full in
the eyes.

"Yes, I think it's worth it," said Andrews. "But you must help me.
Now I am like a man who has come up out of a dark cellar. I'm
almost too dazzled by the gorgeousness of everything. But at least
I am out of the cellar."

"Look, a fish jumped," cried Genevieve. "I wonder if we could hire
a boat anywhere.... Don't you think it'd be fun to go out in a
boat?"

A voice broke in on Genevieve's answer: "Let's see your pass, will
you?"

Andrews turned round. A soldier with a round brown face and red
cheeks stood beside him on the bridge. Andrews looked at him
fixedly. A little zigzag scar above his left eye showed white on
his heavily tanned skin.

"Let's see your pass," the man said again; he had a high pitched,
squeaky voice.

Andrews felt the blood thumping in his ears. "Are you an M. P.?"

"Yes."

"Well I'm in the Sorbonne Detachment."

"What the hell's that?" said the M. P., laughing thinly.

"What does he say?" asked Genevieve, smiling.

"Nothing. I'll have to go see the officer and explain," said
Andrews in a breathless voice. "You go back to your Aunt's and
I'll come as soon as I've arranged it."

"No, I'll come with you."

"Please go back. It may be serious. I'll come as soon as I can,"
said Andrews harshly.

She walked up the hill with swift decisive steps, without turning
round.

"Tough luck, buddy," said the M. P. "She's a good-looker. I'd like
to have a half-hour with her myself."

"Look here. I'm in the Sorbonne School Detachment in Paris, and I
came down here without a pass. Is there anything I can do about
it?"

"They'll fix you up, don't worry," cried the M. P. shrilly. "You
ain't a member of the General Staff in disguise, are ye? School
Detachment! Gee, won't Bill Huggis laugh when he hears that? You
pulled the best one yet, buddy.... But come along," he added in a
confidential tone. "If you come quiet I won't put the handcuffs on
ye."

"How do I know you're an M. P.?"

"You'll know soon enough."

They turned down a narrow street between grey stucco walls leprous
with moss and water stains.

At a chair inside the window of a small wine shop a man with a red
M. P. badge sat smoking. He got up when he saw them pass and
opened the door with one hand on his pistol holster.

"I got one bird, Bill," said the man, shoving Andrews roughly in
the door.

"Good for you, Handsome; is he quiet?"

"Um." Handsome grunted.

"Sit down there. If you move you'll git a bullet in your guts."

The M. P. stuck out a square jaw; he had a sallow skin, puffy
under the eyes that were grey and lustreless.

"He says he's in some goddam School Detachment. First time that's
been pulled, ain't it?"

"School Detachment. D'you mean an O. T. C?" Bill sank laughing
into his chair by the window, spreading his legs out over the
floor.

"Ain't that rich?" said Handsome, laughing shrilly again.

"Got any papers on ye? Ye must have some sort of papers."

Andrews searched his pockets. He flushed.

"I ought to have a school pass."

"You sure ought. Gee, this guy's simple," said Bill, leaning far
back in the chair and blowing smoke through his nose.

"Look at his dawg-tag, Handsome."

The man strode over to Andrews and jerked open the top of his
tunic. Andrews pulled his body away.

"I haven't got any on. I forgot to put any on this morning."

"No tag, no insignia."

"Yes, I have, infantry."

"No papers.... I bet he's been out a hell of a time," said
Handsome meditatively.

"Better put the cuffs on him," said Bill in the middle of a yawn.

"Let's wait a while. When's the loot coming?"

"Not till night."

"Sure?"

"Yes. Ain't no train."

"How about a side car?"

"No, I know he ain't comin'," snarled Bill.

"What d'you say we have a little liquor, Bill? Bet this bloke's
got money. You'll set us up to a glass o' cognac, won't you,
School Detachment?"

Andrews sat very stiff in his chair, staring at them.

"Yes," he said, "order up what you like."

"Keep an eye on him, Handsome. You never can tell what this quiet
kind's likely to pull off on you."

Bill Huggis strode out of the room with heavy steps. In a moment
he came back swinging a bottle of cognac in his hand.

"Tole the Madame you'd pay, Skinny," said the man as he passed
Andrews's chair. Andrews nodded.

The two M. P.'s drew up to the table beside which Andrews sat.
Andrews could not keep his eyes off them. Bill Huggis hummed as he
pulled the cork out of the bottle.

"It's the smile that makes you happy,
 It's the smile that makes you sad."

Handsome watched him, grinning.

Suddenly they both burst out laughing.

"An" the damn fool thinks he's in a school battalion," said
Handsome in his shrill voice.

"It'll be another kind of a battalion you'll be in, Skinny," cried
Bill Huggis. He stifled his laughter with a long drink from the
bottle.

He smacked his lips.

"Not so goddam bad," he said. Then he started humming again:

"It's the smile that makes you happy,
 It's the smile that makes you sad."

"Have some, Skinny?" said Handsome, pushing the bottle towards
Andrews.

"No, thanks," said Andrews.

"Ye won't be gettin' good cognac where yer goin', Skinny, not by a
damn sight," growled Bill Huggis in the middle of a laugh.

"All right, I'll take a swig." An idea had suddenly come into
Andrews's head.

"Gee, the bastard kin drink cognac," cried Handsome.

"Got enough money to buy us another bottle?"

Andrews nodded. He wiped his mouth absently with his handkerchief;
he had drunk the raw cognac without tasting it.

"Get another bottle, Handsome," said Bill Huggis carelessly. A
purplish flush had appeared in the lower part of his cheeks. When
the other man came back, he burst out laughing.

"The last cognac this Skinny guy from the school detachment'll get
for many a day. Better drink up strong, Skinny.... They don't have
that stuff down on the farm.... School Detachment; I'll be
goddamned!" He leaned back in his chair, shaking with laughter.

Handsome's face was crimson. Only the zigzag scar over his eye
remained white. He was swearing in a low voice as he worked the
cork out of the bottle.

Andrews could not keep his eyes off the men's faces. They went
from one to the other, in spite of him. Now and then, for an
instant, he caught a glimpse of the yellow and brown squares of
the wall paper and the bar with a few empty bottles behind it.
He tried to count the bottles; "one, two, three..." but he was
staring in the lustreless grey eyes of Bill Huggis, who lay back
in his chair, blowing smoke out of his nose, now and then reaching
for the cognac bottle, all the while humming faintly, under his
breath:

"It's the smile that makes you happy,
 It's the smile that makes you sad."

Handsome sat with his elbows on the table, and his chin in his
beefy hands. His face was flushed crimson, but the skin was softly
moulded, like a woman's.

The light in the room was beginning to grow grey.

Handsome and Bill Huggis stood up. A young officer, with clearly-
marked features and a campaign hat worn a little on one side, came
in, stood with his feet wide apart in the middle of the floor.

Andrews went up to him.

"I'm in the Sorbonne Detachment, Lieutenant, stationed in Paris."

"Don't you know enough to salute?" said the officer, looking him
up and down. "One of you men teach him to salute," he said slowly.

Handsome made a step towards Andrews and hit him with his fist
between the eyes. There was a flash of light and the room swung
round, and there was a splitting crash as his head struck the
floor. He got to his feet. The fist hit him in the same place,
blinding him, the three figures and the bright oblong of the
window swung round. A chair crashed down with him, and a hard rap
in the back of his skull brought momentary blackness.

"That's enough, let him be," he heard a voice far away at the end
of a black tunnel.

A great weight seemed to be holding him down as he struggled to
get up, blinded by tears and blood. Rending pains darted like
arrows through his head. There were handcuffs on his wrists.

"Git up," snarled a voice.

He got to his feet, faint light came through the streaming tears
in his eyes. His forehead flamed as if hot coals were being
pressed against it.

"Prisoner, attention!" shouted the officer's voice. "March!"

Automatically, Andrews lifted one foot and then the other. He felt
in his face the cool air of the street. On either side of him were
the hard steps of the M. P.'s. Within him a nightmare voice was
shrieking, shrieking.



                     PART SIX: UNDER THE WHEELS

                              I

The uncovered garbage  cans clattered  as they were thrown one by
one into the truck. Dust, and a smell of putrid things, hung in
the  air about the men  as  they worked. A guard stood by with his
legs wide apart, and his rifle-butt on the pavement between them.
The early mist hung low, hiding the upper windows of the hospital.
From the door beside which the garbage cans were ranged came a
thick odor of carbolic. The last garbage can rattled into place on
the truck, the four prisoners and the guard clambered on, finding
room as best they could among the cans, from which dripped bloody
bandages, ashes, and bits of decaying food, and the truck rumbled
off towards the incinerator, through the   streets of Paris that
sparkled with the gaiety of early morning.

The prisoners wore no tunics; their shirts and breeches had dark
stains of grease and dirt; on their hands were torn canvas gloves.
The guard was a sheepish, pink-faced youth, who kept grinning
apologetically, and had trouble keeping his balance when the truck
went round corners.

"How many days do they keep a guy on this job, Happy?" asked a boy
with mild blue eyes and a creamy complexion, and reddish curly
hair.

"Damned if I know, kid; as long as they please, I guess," said the
bull-necked man next him, who had a lined prize fighter's face,
with a heavy protruding jaw.

Then, after looking at the boy for a minute, with his face
twisted into an astonished sort of grin, he went on: "Say, kid,
how in hell did you git here? Robbin' the cradle, Oi call it, to
send you here, kid."

"I stole a Ford," the boy answered cheerfully.

"Like hell you did!"

"Sold it for five hundred francs."

Happy laughed, and caught hold of an ash can to keep from being
thrown out of the jolting truck.

"Kin ye beat that, guard?" he cried. "Ain't that somethin'?"

The guard sniggered.

"Didn't send me to Leavenworth 'cause I was so young," went on the
kid placidly.

"How old are you, kid?" asked Andrews, who was leaning against the
driver's seat.

"Seventeen," said the boy, blushing and casting his eyes down.

"He must have lied like hell to git in this goddam army," boomed
the deep voice of the truck driver, who had leaned over to spit s
long squirt of tobacco juice.

The truck driver jammed the brakes on. The garbage cans banged
against each other.

The Kid cried out in pain: "Hold your horses, can't you? You
nearly broke my leg."

The truck driver was swearing in a long string of words.

"Goddam these dreamin', skygazin' sons of French bastards. Why
don't they get out of your way? Git out an' crank her up, Happy."

"Guess a feller'd be lucky if he'd break his leg or somethin';
don't you think so, Skinny?" said the fourth prisoner in a low
voice.

"It'll take mor'n a broken leg to git you out o' this labor
battalion, Hoggenback. Won't it, guard?" said Happy, as he climbed
on again.

The truck jolted away, trailing a haze of cinder dust and a sour
stench of garbage behind it. Andrews noticed all at once that they
were going down the quais along the river. Notre Dame was rosy in
the misty sunlight, the color of lilacs in full bloom. He looked
at it fixedly a moment, and then looked away. He felt very far
from it, like a man looking at the stars from the bottom of a pit.

"My mate, he's gone to Leavenworth for five years," said the Kid
when they had been silent some time listening to the rattle of the
garbage cans as the trucks jolted over the cobbles.

"Helped yer steal the Ford, did he?" asked Happy.

"Ford nothin'! He sold an ammunition train. He was a railroad man.
He was a mason, that's why he only got five years."

"I guess five years in Leavenworth's enough for anybody,"
muttered Hoggenback, scowling. He was a square-shouldered dark
man, who always hung his head when he worked.

"We didn't meet up till we got to Paris; we was on a hell of a
party together at the Olympia. That's where they picked us up.
Took us to the Bastille. Ever been in the Bastille?"

"I have," said Hoggenback.

"Ain't no joke, is it?"

"Christ!" said Hoggenback. His face flushed a furious red. He
turned away and looked at the civilians walking briskly along the
early morning streets, at the waiters in shirt sleeves swabbing
off the cafe tables, at the women pushing handcarts full of
bright-colored vegetables over the cobblestones.

"I guess they ain't nobody gone through what we guys go through
with," said Happy. "It'd be better if the ole war was still a'
goin', to my way o' thinkin'. They'd chuck us into the trenches
then. Ain't so low as this."

"Look lively," shouted the truck driver, as the truck stopped in a
dirty yard full of cinder piles. "Ain't got all day. Five more
loads to get yet."

The guard stood by with angry face and stiff limbs; for he feared
there were officers about, and the prisoners started unloading the
garbage cans; their nostrils were full of the stench of
putrescence; between their lips was a gritty taste of cinders.



The air in the dark mess shack was thick with steam from the
kitchen at one end. The men filed past the counter, holding out
their mess kits, into which the K. P.'s splashed the food.
Occasionally someone stopped to ask for a larger helping in an
ingratiating voice. They ate packed together at long tables of
roughly planed boards, stained from the constant spilling of
grease and coffee and still wet from a perfunctory scrubbing.
Andrews sat at the end of a bench, near the door through which
came the glimmer of twilight, eating slowly, surprised at the
relish with which he ate the greasy food, and at the exhausted
contentment that had come over him almost in spite of himself.
Hoggenback sat opposite him.

"Funny," he said to Hoggenback, "it's not really as bad as I
thought it would be."

"What d'you mean, this labor battalion? Hell, a feller can put up
with anything; that's one thing you learn in the army."

"I guess people would rather put up with things than make an
effort to change them."

"You're goddam right. Got a butt?"

Andrews handed him a cigarette. They got to their feet and walked
out into the twilight, holding their mess kits in front of them.
As they were washing their mess kits in a tub of greasy water,
where bits of food floated in a thick scum, Hoggenback suddenly
said in a low voice:

"But it all piles up, Buddy; some day there'll be an accountin'.
D'you believe in religion?"

"No."

"Neither do I. I come of folks as done their own accountin'. My
father an' my gran'father before him. A feller can't eat his bile
day after day, day after day."

"I'm afraid he can, Hoggenback," broke in Andrews. They walked
towards the barracks.

"Goddam it, no," cried Hoggenback aloud. "There comes a point
where you can't eat yer bile any more, where it don't do no good
to cuss. Then you runs amuck." Hanging his head he went slowly
into the barracks.

Andrews leaned against the outside of the building, staring up at
the sky. He was trying desperately to think, to pull together a
few threads of his life in this moment of respite from the
nightmare.  In five minutes the bugle would din in his ears, and
he would be driven into the barracks. A tune came to his head that
he played with eagerly for a moment, and then, as memory came to
him, tried to efface with a shudder of disgust.

"There's the smile that makes you happy,
 There's the smile that makes you sad."

It was almost dark. Two men walked slowly by in front of him.

"Sarge, may I speak to you?" came a voice in a whisper.

The sergeant grunted.

"I think there's two guys trying to break loose out of here."

"Who? If you're wrong it'll be the worse for you, remember that."

"Surley an' Watson. I heard 'em talkin' about it behind the
latrine."

"Damn fools."

"They was sayin' they'd rather be dead than keep up this life."

"They did, did they?"

"Don't talk so loud, Sarge. It wouldn't do for any of the fellers
to know I was talkin' to yer. Say, Sarge..." the voice became
whining, "don't you think I've nearly served my time down here?"

"What do I know about that? 'Tain't my job."

"But, Sarge, I used to be company clerk with my old outfit. Don't
ye need a guy round the office?" Andrews strode past them into the
barracks. Dull fury possessed him. He took off his clothes and got
silently into his blankets.

Hoggenback and Happy were talking beside his bunk.

"Never you mind," said Hoggenback, "somebody'll get that guy
sooner or later."

"Git him, nauthin'! The fellers in that camp was so damn skeered
they jumped if you snapped yer fingers at 'em. It's the
discipline. I'm tellin' yer, it gits a feller in the end," said
Happy.

Andrews lay without speaking, listening to their talk, aching in
every muscle from the crushing work of the day.

"They court-martialled that guy, a feller told me," went on
Hoggenback. "An' what d'ye think they did to him? Retired on half
pay. He was a major."

"Gawd, if I iver git out o' this army, I'll be so goddam glad,"
began Happy. Hoggenback interrupted:

"That you'll forgit all about the raw deal they gave you, an' tell
everybody how fine ye liked it."

Andrews felt the mocking notes of the bugle outside stabbing his
ears. A non-com's voice roared: "Quiet," from the end of the
building, and the lights went out. Already Andrews could hear the
deep breathing of men asleep. He lay awake, staring into the
darkness, his body throbbing with the monotonous rhythms of the
work of the day. He seemed still to hear the sickening whine in
the man's voice as he talked to the sergeant outside in the
twilight. "And shall I be reduced to that?" he was asking himself.



Andrews was leaving the latrine when he heard a voice call softly,
"Skinny."

"Yes," he said.

"Come here, I want to talk to you." It was the Kid's voice. There
was no light in the ill-smelling shack that served for a latrine.
Outside they could hear the guard humming softly to himself as he
went back and forth before the barracks door.

"Let's you and me be buddies, Skinny."

"Sure," said Andrews.

"Say, what d'you think the chance is o' cuttin' loose?"

"Pretty damn poor," said Andrews.

"Couldn't you just make a noise like a hoop an' roll away?"

They giggled softly.

Andrews put his hand on the boy's arm.

"But, Kid, it's too risky. I got in this fix by taking a risk. I
don't feel like beginning over again, and if they catch you, it's
desertion. Leavenworth for twenty years, or life. That'd be the
end of everything."

"Well, what the hell's this?"

"Oh, I don't know; they've got to let us out some day."

"Sh...sh...."

Kid put his hand suddenly over Andrews's mouth. They stood rigid,
so that they could hear their hearts pounding.

Outside there was a brisk step on the gravel. The sentry halted
and saluted. The steps faded into the distance, and the sentry's
humming began again.

"They put two fellers in the jug for a month for talking like we
are.... In solitary," whispered Kid.

"But, Kid, I haven't got the guts to try anything now."

"Sure you have, Skinny. You an' me's got more guts than all the
rest of 'em put together. God, if people had guts, you couldn't
treat 'em like they were curs. Look, if I can ever get out o'
this, I've got a hunch I can make a good thing writing movie
scenarios. I want to get on in the world, Skinny."

"But, Kid, you won't be able to go back to the States."

"I don't care. New Rochelle's not the whole world. They got the
movies in Italy, ain't they?"

"Sure. Let's go to bed."

"All right. Look, you an' me are buddies from now on, Skinny."

Andrews felt the Kid's hand press his arm.

In his dark, airless bunk, in the lowest of three tiers, Andrews
lay awake a long time, listening to the snores and the heavy
breathing about him. Thoughts fluttered restlessly in his head,
but in his blank hopelessness he could only frown and bite his
lips, and roll his head from side to side on the rolled-up tunic
he used for a pillow, listening with desperate attention to the
heavy breathing of the men who slept above him and beside him.

When he fell asleep he dreamed that he was alone with Genevieve
Rod in the concert hall of the Schola Cantorum, and that he was
trying desperately hard to play some tune for her on the violin, a
tune he kept forgetting, and in the agony of trying to remember,
the tears streamed down his cheeks. Then he had his arms round
Genevieve's shoulders and was kissing her, kissing her, until he
found that it was a wooden board he was kissing, a wooden board on
which was painted a face with broad forehead and great pale brown
eyes, and small tight lips, and all the while a boy who seemed to
be both Chrisfield and the Kid kept telling him to run or the
M.P.'s would get him. Then he sat frozen in icy terror with a
bottle in his hand, while a frightful voice behind him sang very
loud:

"There's the smile that makes you happy,
 There's the smile that makes you sad."

The bugle woke him, and he sat up with such a start that he hit
his head hard against the bunk above him. He lay back cringing
from the pain like a child. But he had to hurry desperately to get
his clothes on in time for roll call. It was with a feeling of
relief that he found that mess was not ready, and that men were
waiting in line outside the kitchen shack, stamping their feet and
clattering their mess kits as they moved about through the chilly
twilight of the spring morning. Andrews found he was standing
behind Hoggenback.

"How's she comin', Skinny?" whispered Hoggenback, in his low
mysterious voice.

"Oh, we're all in the same boat," said Andrews with a laugh.

"Wish it'd sink," muttered the other man. "D'ye know," he went on
after a pause, "I kinder thought an edicated guy like you'd be
able to keep out of a mess like this. I wasn't brought up without
edication, but I guess I didn't have enough."

"I guess most of 'em can; I don't sec that it's much to the point.
A man suffers as much if he doesn't know how to read and write as
if he had a college education."

"I dunno, Skinny. A feller who's led a rough life can put up with
an awful lot. The thing is, Skinny, I might have had a commission
if I hadn't been so damned impatient.... I'm a lumberman by trade,
and my dad's cleaned up a pretty thing in war contracts jus' a
short time ago. He could have got me in the engineers if I hadn't
gone off an' enlisted."

"Why did you?"

"I was restless-like. I guess I wanted to see the world. I didn't
care about the goddam war, but I wanted to see what things was
like over here."

"Well, you've seen," said Andrews, smiling.

"In the neck," said Hoggenback, as he pushed out his cup for
coffee.



In the truck that was taking them to work, Andrews and the Kid sat
side by side on the jouncing backboard and tried to talk above the
rumble of the exhaust.

"Like Paris?" asked the Kid.

"Not this way," said Andrews.

"Say, one of the guys said you could parlay French real well. I
want you to teach me. A guy's got to know languages to get along
in this country."

"But you must know some."

"Bedroom French," said the Kid, laughing.

"Well?"

"But if I want to write a movie scenario for an Eytalian firm, I
can't just write 'voulay-vous couchezavecmoa' over and over
again."

"But you'll have to learn Italian, Kid."

"I'm goin' to. Say, ain't they taking us a hell of a ways today,
Skinny?"

"We're goin' to Passy Wharf to unload rock," said somebody in a
grumbling voice.

"No, it's a cement...cement for the stadium we're presentin' the
French Nation. Ain't you read in the 'Stars and Stripes' about
it?"

"I'd present 'em with a swift kick, and a hell of a lot of other
people, too."

"So we have to sweat unloadin' cement all day," muttered
Hoggenback, "to give these goddam frawgs a stadium."

"If it weren't that it'd be somethin' else."

"But, ain't we got folks at home to work for?" cried Hoggenback.
"Mightn't all this sweat be doin' some good for us? Building a
stadium! My gawd!"

"Pile out there.... Quick!" rasped a voice from the driver's seat.

Through the haze of choking white dust, Andrews got now and then a
glimpse of the grey-green river, with its tugboats sporting their
white cockades of steam and their long trailing plumes of smoke,
and its blunt-nosed barges and its bridges, where people walked
jauntily back and forth, going about their business, going where
they wanted to go. The bags of cement were very heavy, and the
unaccustomed work sent racking pains through his back. The biting
dust stung under his finger nails, and in his mouth and eyes. All
the morning a sort of refrain went through his head: "People have
spent their lives...doing only this. People have spent their lives
doing only this." As he crossed and recrossed the narrow plank
from the barge to the shore, he looked at the black water speeding
seawards and took extraordinary care not to let his foot slip. He
did not know why, for one-half of him was thinking how wonderful
it would be to drown, to forget in eternal black silence the
hopeless struggle. Once he saw the Kid standing before the
sergeant in charge in an attitude of complete exhaustion, and
caught a glint of his blue eyes as he looked up appealingly,
looking like a child begging out of a spanking. The sight amused
him, and he said to himself: "If I had pink cheeks and cupid's bow
lips, I might be able to go through life on my blue eyes"; and he
pictured the Kid, a fat, cherubic old man, stepping out of a white
limousine, the way people do in the movies, and looking about him
with those same mild blue eyes. But soon he forgot everything in
the agony of the heavy cement bags bearing down on his back and
hips.

In the truck on the way back to the mess the Kid, looking fresh
and smiling among the sweating men, like ghosts from the white
dust, talking hoarsely above the clatter of the truck, sidled up
very close to Andrews.

"D'you like swimmin', Skinny?"

"Yes. I'd give a lot to get some of this cement dust off me," said
Andrews, without interest.

"I once won a boy's swimmin' race at Coney," said the Kid.
Andrews did not answer.

"Were you in the swimmin' team or anything like that, Skinny, when
you went to school?"

"No.... It would be wonderful to be in the water, though. I used
to swim way out in Chesapeake Bay at night when the water was
phosphorescent."

Andrews suddenly found the Kid's blue eyes, bright as flames from
excitement, staring into his.

"God, I'm an ass," he muttered.

He felt the Kid's fist punch him softly in the back. "Sergeant
said they was goin' to work us late as hell tonight," the Kid was
saying aloud to the men round him.

"I'll be dead if they do," muttered Hoggenback.

"An' you a lumberjack!"

"It ain't that. I could carry their bloody bags two at a time if I
wanted ter. A feller gets so goddam mad, that's all; so goddam
mad. Don't he, Skinny?" Hoggenback turned to Andrews and smiled.

Andrews nodded his head.

After the first two or three bags Andrews carried in the
afternoon, it seemed as if every one would be the last he could
possibly lift. His back and thighs throbbed with exhaustion; his
face and the tips of his fingers felt raw from the biting cement
dust.

When the river began to grow purple with evening, he noticed that
two civilians, young men with buff-colored coats and canes, were
watching the gang at work.

"They says they's newspaper reporters, writing up how fast the
army's being demobilized," said one man in an awed voice.

"They come to the right place."

"Tell 'em we're leavin' for home now. Loadin' our barracks bags on
the steamer.

The newspaper men were giving out cigarettes. Several men grouped
round them. One shouted out:

"We're the guys does the light work. Blackjack Pershing's own pet
labor battalion."

"They like us so well they just can't let us go."

"Damn jackasses," muttered Hoggenback, as, with his eyes to the
ground, he passed Andrews. "I could tell 'em some things'd make
their goddam ears buzz."

"Why don't you?"

"What the hell's the use? I ain't got the edication to talk up to
guys like that."

The sergeant, a short, red-faced man with a mustache clipped very
short, went up to the group round the newspaper men.

"Come on, fellers, we've got a hell of a lot of this cement to get
in before it rains," he said in a kindly voice; "the sooner we get
it in, the sooner we get off."

"Listen to that bastard, ain't he juss too sweet for pie when
there's company?" muttered Hoggenback on his way from the barge
with a bag of cement.

The Kid brushed past Andrews without looking at him.

"Do what I do, Skinny," he said.

Andrews did not turn round, but his heart started thumping very
fast. A dull sort of terror took possession of him. He tried
desperately to summon his will power, to keep from cringing, but
he kept remembering the way the room had swung round when the M.P.
had hit him, and heard again the cold voice of the lieutenant
saying: "One of you men teach him how to salute."
Time dragged out interminably.

At last, coming back to the edge of the wharf, Andrews saw that
there were no more bags in the barge. He sat down on the plank,
too exhausted to think. Blue-grey dusk was closing down on
everything. The Passy bridge stood out, purple against a great
crimson afterglow.

The Kid sat down beside him, and threw an arm trembling with
excitement round his shoulders.

"The guard's lookin' the other way. They won't miss us till they
get to the truck.... Come on, Skinny," he said in a low, quiet
voice.

Holding on to the plank, he let himself down into the speeding
water. Andrews slipped after him, hardly knowing what he was
doing. The icy water closing about his body made him suddenly feel
awake and vigorous. As he was swept by the big rudder of the
barge, he caught hold of the Kid, who was holding on to a rope.
They worked their way without speaking round to the outer side of
the rudder. The swift river tugging savagely at them made it hard
to hold on.

"Now they can't see us," said the Kid between clenched teeth. "Can
you work your shoes an' pants off?"'

Andrews started struggling with one boot, the Kid helping to hold
him up with his free hand.

"Mine are off," he said. "I was all fixed." He laughed, though his
teeth were chattering.

"All right. I've broken the laces," said Andrews.

"Can you swim under water?"

Andrews nodded.

"We want to make for that bunch of barges the other side of the
bridge. The barge people'll hide us."

"How d'ye know they will?"

The Kid had disappeared.

Andrews hesitated a moment, then let go his hold and started
swimming with the current for all his might.

At first he felt strong and exultant, but very soon he began to
feel the icy grip of the water bearing him down; his arms and legs
seemed to stiffen. More than against the water, he was struggling
against paralysis within him, so that he thought that every moment
his limbs would go rigid. He came to the surface and gasped for
air. He had a second's glimpse of figures, tiny like toy soldiers,
gesticulating wildly on the deck of the barge. The report of a
rifle snapped through the air. He dove again, without thinking, as
if his body were working independently of his mind.

The next time he came up, his eyes were blurred from the cold.
There was a taste of blood in his mouth. The shadow of the bridge
was just above him. He turned on his back for a second. There were
lights on the bridge. A current swept him past one barge and then
another. Certainty possessed him that he was going to be drowned.
A voice seemed to sob in his ears grotesquely: "And so John
Andrews was drowned in the Seine, drowned in the Seine, in the
Seine."

Then he was kicking and fighting in a furious rage against the
coils about him that wanted to drag him down and away. The black
side of a barge was slipping up stream beside him with lightning
speed. How fast those barges go, he thought. Then suddenly he
found that he had hold of a rope, that his shoulders were banging
against the bow of a small boat, while in front of him, against
the dull purple sky, towered the rudder of the barge. A strong
warm hand grasped his shoulder from behind, and he was being drawn
up and up, over the bow of the boat that hurt his numbed body like
blows, out of the clutching coils of the water.

"Hide me, I'm a deserter," he said over and over again in French.
A brown and red face with a bristly white beard, a bulbous,
mullioned sort of face, hovered over him in the middle of a
pinkish mist.



                             II

"Oh, qu'il est propre! Oh, qu'il a la peau blanche!" Women's
voices were shrilling behind the mist. A coverlet that felt soft
and fuzzy against his skin was being put about him. He was very
warm and torpid. But somewhere in his thoughts a black crawling
thing like a spider was trying to reach him, trying to work its
way through the pinkish veils of torpor. After a long while he
managed to roll over, and looked about him.

"Mais reste tranquille," came the woman's shrill voice again.

"And the other one? Did you see the other one?" he asked in a
choked whisper.

"Yes, it's all right. I'm drying it by the stove," came another
woman's voice, deep and growling, almost like a man's.

"Maman's drying your money by the stove. It's all safe. How rich
they are, these Americans!"

"And to think that I nearly threw it overboard with the trousers,"
said the other woman again.

John Andrews began to look about him. He was in a dark low cabin.
Behind him, in the direction of the voices, a yellow light
flickered. Great dishevelled shadows of heads moved about on the
ceiling. Through the close smell of the cabin came a warmth of
food cooking. He could hear the soothing hiss of frying grease.

"But didn't you see the Kid?" he asked in English, dazedly trying
to pull himself together, to think coherently. Then he went on in
French in a more natural voice:

"There was another one with me."

"We saw no one. Rosaline, ask the old man," said the older woman.

"No, he didn't see anyone," came the girl's shrill voice. She
walked over to the bed and pulled the coverlet round Andrews with
an awkward gesture. Looking up at her, he had a glimpse of the
bulge of her breasts and her large teeth that glinted in the
lamplight, and very vague in the shadow, a mop of snaky,
disordered hair.

"Qu'il parle bien francais," she said, beaming at him. Heavy
steps shuffled across the cabin as the older woman came up to the
bed and peered in his face.

"Il va mieux," she said, with a knowing air.

She was a broad woman with a broad flat face and a swollen body
swathed in shawls. Her eyebrows were very bushy, and she had thick
grey whiskers that came down to a point on either side of her
mouth, as well as a few bristling hairs on her chin. Her voice was
deep and growling, and seemed to come from far down inside her
huge body.

Steps creaked somewhere, and the old man looked at him through
spectacles placed on the end of his nose. Andrews recognized the
irregular face full of red knobs and protrusions.

"Thanks very much," he said.

All three looked at him silently for some time. Then the old man
pulled a newspaper out of his pocket, unfolded it carefully, and
fluttered it above Andrews's eyes. In the scant light Andrews made
out the name: "Libertaire."

"That's why," said the old man, looking at Andrews fixedly,
through his spectacles.

"I'm a sort of a socialist," said Andrews.

"Socialists are good-for-nothings," snarled the old man, every red
protrusion on his face seeming to get redder.

"But I have great sympathy for anarchist comrades," went on
Andrews, feeling a certain liveliness of amusement go through him
and fade again.

"Lucky you caught hold of my rope, instead of getting on to the
next barge. He'd have given you up for sure. Sont des royalistes,
ces salauds-la."

"We must give him something to eat; hurry, Maman.... Don't worry,
he'll pay, won't you, my little American?"

Andrews nodded his head.

"All you want," he said.

"No, if he says he's a comrade, he shan't pay, not a sou," growled
the old man.

"We'll see about that," cried the old woman, drawing her breath in
with an angry whistling sound.

"It's only that living's so dear nowadays," came the girl's voice.

"Oh, I'll pay anything I've got," said Andrews peevishly, closing
his eyes again.

He lay a long while on his back without moving.

A hand shoved in between his back and the pillow roused him. He
sat up. Rosaline was holding a bowl of broth in front of him that
steamed in his face.

"Mange ca," she said.

He looked into her eyes, smiling. Her rusty hair was neatly
combed. A bright green parrot with a scarlet splash in its wings,
balanced itself unsteadily on her shoulder, looking at Andrews out
of angry eyes, hard as gems.

"Il est jaloux, Coco," said Rosaline, with a shrill little giggle.

Andrews took the bowl in his two hands and drank some of the
scalding broth.

"It's too hot," he said, leaning back against the girl's arm.

The parrot squawked out a sentence that Andrews did not
understand.

Andrews heard the old man's voice answer from somewhere behind
him:

"Nom de Dieu!"

The parrot squawked again.

Rosaline laughed.

"It's the old man who taught him that," she said. "Poor Coco, he
doesn't know what he's saying."

"What does he say?" asked Andrews.

"'Les bourgeois a la lanterne, nom de dieu!' It's from a song,"
said Rosaline. "Oh, qu'il est malin, ce Coco!"

Rosaline was standing with her arms folded beside the bunk. The
parrot stretched out his neck and rubbed it against her cheek,
closing and unclosing his gem-like eyes. The girl formed her lips
into a kiss, and murmured in a drowsy voice:

"Tu m'aimes, Coco, n'est-ce pas, Coco? Bon Coco."

"Could I have something more, I'm awfully hungry," said Andrews.

"Oh, I was forgetting," cried Rosaline, running off with the empty
bowl.

In a moment she came back without the parrot, with the bowl in her
hand full of a brown stew of potatoes and meat.

Andrews ate it mechanically, and handed back the bowl.

"Thank you," he said, "I am going to sleep."

He settled himself into the bunk. Rosaline drew the covers up
about him and tucked them in round his shoulders. Her hand seemed
to linger a moment as it brushed past his cheek. But Andrews had
already sunk into a torpor again, feeling nothing but the warmth
of the food within him and a great stiffness in his legs and arms.

When he woke up the light was grey instead of yellow, and a
swishing sound puzzled him. He lay listening to it for a long
time, wondering what it was. At last the thought came with a
sudden warm spurt of joy that the barge must be moving.

He lay very quietly on his back, looking up at the faint silvery
light on the ceiling of the bunk, thinking of nothing, with only a
vague dread in the back of his head that someone would come to
speak to him, to question him.

After a long time he began to think of Genevieve Rod. He was
having a long conversation with her about his music, and in his
imagination she kept telling him that he must finish the "Queen of
Sheba," and that she would show it to Monsieur Gibier, who was a
great friend of a certain concert director, who might get it
played. How long ago it must be since they had talked about that.
A picture floated through his mind of himself and Genevieve
standing shoulder to shoulder looking at the Cathedral at Chartres,
which stood up nonchalantly, above the tumultuous roofs of the
town, with its sober tower and its gaudy towers and the great rose
windows between. Inexorably his memory carried him forward, moment
by moment, over that day, until he writhed with shame and revolt.
Good god! Would he have to go on all his life remembering that?
"Teach him how to salute," the officer had said, and Handsome had
stepped up to him and hit him. Would he have to go on all his life
remembering that?

"We tied up the uniform with some stones, and threw it overboard,"
said Rosaline, jabbing him in the shoulder to draw his attention.

"That was a good idea."

"Are you going to get up? It's nearly time to eat. How you have
slept."

"But I haven't anything to put on," said Andrews, laughing, and
waved a bare arm above the bedclothes.

"Wait, I'll find something of the old man's. Say, do all Americans
have skin so white as that? Look."

She put her brown hand, with its grimed and broken nails, on
Andrews's arm, that was white with a few silky yellow hairs.

"It's because I'm blond," said Andrews. "There are plenty of blond
Frenchmen, aren't there?"

Rosaline ran off giggling, and came back in a moment with a pair
of corduroy trousers and a torn flannel shirt that smelt of pipe
tobacco.

"That'll do for now," she said. "It's warm today for April.
Tonight we'll buy you some clothes and shoes. Where are you
going?"

"By God, I don't know."

"We're going to Havre for cargo." She put both hands to her head
and began rearranging her straggling rusty-colored hair. "Oh, my
hair," she said, "it's the water, you know. You can't keep
respectable-looking on these filthy barges. Say, American, why
don't you stay with us a while? You can help the old man run the
boat."

He found suddenly that her eyes were looking into his with
trembling eagerness.

"I don't know what to do," he said carelessly. "I wonder if it's
safe to go on deck."

She turned away from him petulantly and led the way up the ladder.

"Oh, v'la le camarade," cried the old man who was leaning with all
his might against the long tiller of the barge. "Come and help
me."

The barge was the last of a string of four that were describing a
wide curve in the midst of a reach of silvery river full of
glittering patches of pale, pea-green lavender, hemmed in on
either side by frail blue roots of poplars. The sky was a mottled
luminous grey with occasional patches, the color of robins' eggs.
Andrews breathed in the dank smell of the river and leaned against
the tiller when he was told to, answering the old man's curt
questions.

He stayed with the tiller when the rest of them went down to the
cabin to eat. The pale colors and the swishing sound of the water
and the blue-green banks slipping by and unfolding on either hand,
were as soothing as his deep sleep had been. Yet they seemed only
a veil covering other realities, where men stood interminably in
line and marched with legs made all the same length on the drill
field, and wore the same clothes and cringed before the same
hierarchy of polished belts and polished puttees and stiff-visored
caps, that had its homes in vast offices crammed with index cards
and card catalogues; a world full of the tramp of marching, where
cold voices kept saying:--"Teach him how to salute." Like a bird
in a net, Andrews's mind struggled to free itself from the
obsession.

Then he thought of his table in his room in Paris, with its piled
sheets of ruled paper, and he felt he wanted nothing in the world
except to work. It would not matter what happened to him if he
could only have time to weave into designs the tangled skein of
music that seethed through him as the blood seethed through his
veins.

There he stood, leaning against the long tiller, watching the
blue-green poplars glide by, here and there reflected in the
etched silver mirror of the river, feeling the moist river wind
flutter his ragged shirt, thinking of nothing.

After a while the old man came up out of the cabin, his face
purplish, puffing clouds of smoke out of his pipe.

"All right, young fellow, go down and eat," he said.



Andrews lay flat on his belly on the deck, with his chin resting
on the back of his two hands. The barge was tied up along the
river bank among many other barges. Beside him, a small fuzzy dog
barked furiously at a yellow mongrel on the shore. It was nearly
dark, and through the pearly mist of the river came red oblongs of
light from the taverns along the bank. A slip of a new moon,
shrouded in haze, was setting behind the poplar trees. Amid the
round of despairing thoughts, the memory of the Kid intruded
itself. He had sold a Ford for five hundred francs, and gone on a
party with a man who'd stolen an ammunition train, and he wanted
to write for the Italian movies. No war could down people like
that. Andrews smiled, looking into the black water. Funny, the Kid
was dead, probably, and he, John Andrews, was alive and free. And
he lay there moping, still whimpering over old wrongs. "For God's
sake be a man!" he said to himself. He got to his feet.

At the cabin door, Rosaline was playing with the parrot.

"Give me a kiss, Coco," she was saying in a drowsy voice, "just a
little kiss. Just a little kiss for Rosaline, poor little
Rosaline."

The parrot, which Andrews could hardly see in the dusk, leaned
towards her, fluttering his feathers, making little clucking
noises.

Rosaline caught sight of Andrews.

"Oh, I thought you'd gone to have a drink with the old man," she
cried.

"No. I stayed here."

"D'you like it, this life?"

Rosaline put the parrot back on his perch, where he swayed from
side to side, squawking in protest: "Les bourgeois a la lanterne,
nom de dieu!"

They both laughed.

"Oh, it must be a wonderful life. This barge seems like heaven
after the army."

"But they pay you well, you Americans."

"Seven francs a day."

"That's luxury, that."

"And be ordered around all day long!"

"But you have no expenses.... It's clear gain.... You men are
funny. The old man's like that too.... It's nice here all by
ourselves, isn't it, Jean?"

Andrews did not answer. He was wondering what Genevieve Rod would
say when she found out he was a deserter.

"I hate it.... It's dirty and cold and miserable in winter," went
on Rosaline. "I'd like to see them at the bottom of the river, all
these barges.... And Paris women, did you have a good time with
them?"

"I only knew one. I go very little with women."

"All the same, love's nice, isn't it?"

They were sitting on the rail at the bow of the barge. Rosaline
had sidled up so that her leg touched Andrews's leg along its
whole length.

The memory of Genevieve Rod became more and more vivid in his
mind. He kept thinking of things she had said, of the intonations
of her voice, of the blundering way she poured tea, and of her
pale-brown eyes wide open on the world, like the eyes of a woman
in an encaustic painting from a tomb in the Fayoum.

"Mother's talking to the old woman at the Creamery. They're great
friends. She won't be home for two hours yet," said Rosaline.

"She's bringing my clothes, isn't she?"

"But you're all right as you are."

"But they're your father's."

"What does that matter?"

"I must go back to Paris soon. There is somebody I must see in
Paris."

"A woman?"

Andrews nodded.

"But it's not so bad, this life on the barge. I'm just lonesome
and sick of the old people. That's why I talk nastily about
it.... We could have good times together if you stayed with us a
little."

She leaned her head on his shoulder and put a hand awkwardly on
his bare forearm.

"How cold these Americans are!" she muttered, giggling drowsily.

Andrews felt her hair tickle his cheek.

"No, it's not a bad life on the barge, honestly. The only thing
is, there's nothing but old people on the river. It isn't life to
be always with old people.... I want to have a good time."

She pressed her cheek against his. He could feel her breath heavy
in his face.

"After all, it's lovely in summer to drowse on the deck that's all
warm with the sun, and see the trees and the fields and the little
houses slipping by on either side.... If there weren't so many old
people.... All the boys go away to the cities.... I hate old
people; they're so dirty and slow. We mustn't waste our youth,
must we?"

Andrews got to his feet.

"What's the matter?" she cried sharply.

"Rosaline," Andrews said in a low, soft voice, "I can only think
of going to Paris."

"Oh, the Paris woman," said Rosaline scornfully. "But what does
that matter? She isn't here now."

"I don't know.... Perhaps I shall never see her again anyway,"
said Andrews.

"You're a fool. You must amuse yourself when you can in this life.
And you a deserter.... Why, they may catch you and shoot you any
time."

"Oh, I know, you're right. You're right. But I'm not made like
that, that's all."

"She must be very good to you, your little Paris girl."

"I've never touched her."

Rosaline threw her head back and laughed raspingly.

"But you aren't sick, are you?" she cried.

"Probably I remember too vividly, that's all.... Anyway, I'm a
fool, Rosaline, because you're a nice girl."

There were steps on the plank that led to the shore. A shawl over
her head and a big bundle under her arm, the old woman came up to
them, panting wheezily. She looked from one to the other, trying
to make out their faces in the dark.

"It's a danger...like that...youth," she muttered between hard
short breaths.

"Did you find the clothes?" asked Andrews in a casual voice.

"Yes. That leaves you forty-five francs out of your money, when
I've taken out for your food and all that. Does that suit you?"

"Thank you very much for your trouble."

"You paid for it. Don't worry about that," said the old woman. She
gave him the bundle. "Here are your clothes and the forty-five
francs. If you want, I'll tell you exactly what each thing cost."

"I'll put them on first," he said, with a laugh.

He climbed down the ladder into the cabin.

Putting on new, unfamiliar-shaped clothes made him suddenly feel
strong and joyous. The old woman had bought him corduroy trousers,
cheap cloth shoes, a blue cotton shirt, woollen socks, and a
second-hand black serge jacket. When he came on deck she held up a
lantern to look at him.

"Doesn't he look fine, altogether French?" she said.

Rosaline turned away without answering. A little later she picked
up the perch and carried the parrot, that swayed sleepily on the
crosspiece, down the ladder.

"Les bourgeois a la lanterne, nom de dieu!" came the old man's
voice singing on the shore.

"He's drunk as a pig," muttered the old woman. "If only he doesn't
fall off the gang plank."

A swaying shadow appeared at the end of the plank, standing out
against the haze of light from the houses behind the poplar trees.

Andrews put out a hand to catch him, as he reached the side of the
barge. The old man sprawled against the cabin.

"Don't bawl me out, dearie," he said, dangling an arm round
Andrews's neck, and a hand beckoning vaguely towards his wife.

"I've found a comrade for the little American."

"What's that?" said Andrews sharply. His mouth suddenly went dry
with terror. He felt his nails pressing into the palms of his
cold-hands.

"I've found another American for you," said the old man in an
important voice. "Here he comes." Another shadow appeared at the
end of the gangplank.

"Les bourgeois a la lanterne, nom de dieu!" shouted the old man.

Andrews backed away cautiously towards the other side of the
barge. All the little muscles of his thighs were trembling. A hard
voice was saying in his head: "Drown yourself, drown yourself.
Then they won't get you."

The man was standing on the end of the plank. Andrews could see
the contour of the uniform against the haze of light behind the
poplar trees.

"God, if I only had a pistol," he thought.

"Say, Buddy, where are you?" came an American voice.

The man advanced towards him across the deck.

Andrews stood with every muscle taut.

"Gee! You've taken off your uniform.... Say, I'm not an M.P. I'm
A.W.O.L. too. Shake." He held out his hand.

Andrews took the hand doubtfully, without moving from the edge of
the barge.

"Say, Buddy, it's a damn fool thing to take off your uniform.
Ain't you got any? If they pick you up like that it's life, kid."

"I can't help it. It's done now."

"Gawd, you still think I'm an M.P., don't yer?... I swear I ain't.
Maybe you are. Gawd, it's hell, this life. A feller can't put his
trust in nobody."

"What division are you from?"

"Hell, I came to warn you this bastard frawg's got soused an' has
been blabbin' in the gin mill there how he was an anarchist an'
all that, an' how he had an American deserter who was an anarchist
an' all that, an' I said to myself: 'That guy'll git nabbed if he
ain't careful,' so I cottoned up to the old frawg an' said I'd go
with him to see the camarade, an' I think we'd better both of us
make tracks out o' this burg."

"It's damn decent. I'm sorry I was so suspicious. I was scared
green when I first saw you."

"You were goddam right to be. But why did yous take yer uniform
off?"

"Come along, let's beat it. I'll tell you about that."

Andrews shook hands with the old man and the old woman. Rosaline
had disappeared.

"Goodnight...Thank you," he said, and followed the other man
across the gangplank.

As they walked away along the road they heard the old man's voice
roaring:

"Les bourgeois a la lanterne, nom de dieu!"

"My name's Eddy Chambers," said the American.

"Mine's John Andrews."

"How long've you been out?"

"Two days."

Eddy let the air out through his teeth in a whistle.

"I got away from a labor battalion in Paris. They'd picked me up
in Chartres without a pass."

"Gee, I've been out a month an' more. Was you infantry too?"

"Yes. I was in the School Detachment in Paris when I was picked
up. But I never could get word to them. They just put me to work
without a trial. Ever been in a labor battalion?"

"No, thank Gawd, they ain't got my number yet."

They were walking fast along a straight road across a plain under
a clear star-powdered sky.

"I been out eight weeks yesterday. What'd you think o' that?" said
Eddy.

"Must have had plenty of money to go on."

"I've been flat fifteen days."

"How d'you work it?"

"I dunno. I juss work it though.... Ye see, it was this way. The
gang I was with went home when I was in hauspital, and the damn
skunks put me in class A and was goin' to send me to the Army of
Occupation. Gawd, it made me sick, goin' out to a new outfit where
I didn't know anybody, an' all the rest of my bunch home walkin'
down Water Street with brass bands an' reception committees an'
girls throwing kisses at 'em an' all that. Where are yous goin'?"

"Paris."

"Gee, I wouldn't. Risky."

"But I've got friends there. I can get hold of some money."

"Looks like I hadn't got a friend in the world. I wish I'd gone to
that goddam outfit now.... I ought to have been in the engineers
all the time, anyway."

"What did you do at home?"

"Carpenter."

"But gosh, man, with a trade like that you can always make a
living anywhere."

"You're goddam right, I could, but a guy has to live underground,
like a rabbit, at this game. If I could git to a country where I
could walk around like a man, I wouldn't give a damn what
happened. If the army ever moves out of here an' the goddam
M.P.'s, I'll set up in business in one of these here little towns.
I can parlee pretty well. I'd juss as soon marry a French girl an'
git to be a regular frawg myself. After the raw deal they've given
me in the army, I don't want to have nothin' more to do with their
damn country. Democracy!"

He cleared his throat and spat angrily on the road before him.
They walked on silently. Andrews was looking at the sky, picking
out constellations he knew among the glittering masses of stars.

"Why don't you try Spain or Italy?" he said after a while.

"Don't know the lingo. No, I'm going to Scotland."

"But how can you get there?"

"Crossing on the car ferries to England from Havre. I've talked to
guys has done it."

"But what'll you do when you do get there?"

"How should I know? Live around best I can. What can a feller do
when he don't dare show his face in the street?"

"Anyway, it makes you feel as if you had some guts in you to be
out on your own this way," cried Andrews boisterously.

"Wait till you've been at it two months, boy, and you'll think
what I'm tellin' yer.... The army's hell when you're in it; but
it's a hell of a lot worse when you're out of it, at the wrong
end."

"It's a great night, anyway," said Andrews.

"Looks like we ought to be findin' a haystack to sleep in."

"It'd be different," burst out Andrews, suddenly, "if I didn't
have friends here."

"O, you've met up with a girl, have you?" asked Eddy ironically.

"Yes. The thing is we really get along together, besides all the
rest."

Eddy snorted.

"I bet you ain't ever even kissed her," he said. "Gee, I've had
buddies has met up with that friendly kind. I know a guy married
one, an' found out after two weeks."

"It's silly to talk about it. I can't explain it.... It gives you
confidence in anything to feel there's someone who'll always
understand anything you do."

"I s'pose you're goin' to git married."

"I don't see why. That would spoil everything."

Eddy whistled softly.

They walked along briskly without speaking for a long time, their
steps ringing on the hard road, while the dome of the sky
shimmered above their heads. And from the ditches came the
singsong shrilling of toads. For the first time in months Andrews
felt himself bubbling with a spirit of joyous adventure. The
rhythm of the three green horsemen that was to have been the
prelude to the Queen of Sheba began rollicking through his head.

"But, Eddy, this is wonderful. It's us against the universe," he
said in a boisterous voice.

"You wait," said Eddy.



When Andrews walked by the M.P. at the Gare-St. Lazare, his hands
were cold with fear. The M.P. did not look at him. He stopped on
the crowded pavement a little way from the station and stared into
a mirror in a shop window. Unshaven, with a check cap on the side
of his head and his corduroy trousers, he looked like a young
workman who had been out of work for a month.

"Gee, clothes do make a difference," he said to himself. He smiled
when he thought how shocked Walters would be when he turned up in
that rig, and started walking with leisurely stride across Paris,
where everything bustled and jingled with early morning, where
from every cafe came a hot smell of coffee, and fresh bread
steamed in the windows of the bakeries. He still had three francs
in his pocket. On a side street the fumes of coffee roasting
attracted him into a small bar. Several men were arguing
boisterously at the end of the bar. One of them turned a ruddy,
tow-whiskered face to Andrews, and said:

"Et toi, tu vas chomer le premier mai?"

"I'm on strike already," answered Andrews laughing.

The man noticed his accent, looked at him sharply a second, and
turned back to the conversation, lowering his voice as he did so.
Andrews drank down his coffee and left the bar, his heart
pounding. He could not help glancing back over his shoulder now
and then to see if he was being followed. At a corner he stopped
with his fists clenched and leaned a second against a house wall.

"Where's your nerve. Where's your nerve?" He was saying to
himself.

He strode off suddenly, full of bitter determination not to turn
round again. He tried to occupy his mind with plans. Let's see,
what should he do? First he'd go to his room and look up old
Henslowe and Walters. Then he would go to see Genevieve. Then he'd
work, work, forget everything in his work, until the army should
go back to America and there should be no more uniforms on the
streets. And as for the future, what did he care about the future?

When he turned the corner into the familiar street where his room
was, a thought came to him. Suppose he should find M.P.'s waiting
for him there? He brushed it aside angrily and strode fast up the
sidewalk, catching up to a soldier who was slouching along in the
same direction, with his hands in his pockets and eyes on the
ground. Andrews stopped suddenly as he was about to pass the
soldier and turned. The man looked up. It was Chrisfield.

Andrews held out his hand.

Chrisfield seized it eagerly and shook it for a long time.
"Jesus Christ! Ah thought you was a Frenchman, Andy.... Ah guess
you got yer dis-charge then. God, Ah'm glad."

"I'm glad I look like a Frenchman, anyway.... Been on leave long,
Chris?"

Two buttons were off the front of Chrisfield's uniform; there were
streaks of dirt on his face, and his puttees were clothed with
mud. He looked Andrews seriously in the eyes, and shook his head.

"No. Ah done flew the coop, Andy," he said in a low voice.

"Since when?"

"Ah been out a couple o' weeks. Ah'll tell you about it, Andy. Ah
was comin' to see you now. Ah'm broke."

"Well look, I'll be able to get hold of some money tomorrow ....
I'm out too."

"What d'ye mean?"

"I haven't got a discharge. I'm through with it all. I've
deserted."

"God damn! That's funny that you an' me should both do it, Andy.
But why the hell did you do it?"

"Oh, it's too long to tell here. Come up to my. room."

"There may be fellers there. Ever been at the Chink's?"

"No."

"I'm stayin' there. There're other fellers who's A.W. O.L. too.
The Chink's got a gin mill."

"Where is it."

"Eight, rew day Petee Jardings."

"Where's that?"

"Way back of that garden where the animals are."

"Look, I can find you there tomorrow morning, and I'll bring some
money."

"Ah'll wait for ye, Andy, at nine. It's a bar. Ye won't be able to
git in without me, the kids is pretty scared of plainclothes men."

"I think it'll be perfectly safe to come up to my place now."

"Now, Ah'm goin' to git the hell out of here."

"But Chris, why did you go A.W.O.L.?"

"Oh, Ah doan know.... A guy who's in the Paris detachment got yer
address for me."

"But, Chris, did they say anything to him about me?"

"No, nauthin'."

"That's funny.... Well, Chris, I'll be there tomorrow, if I can
find the place."

"Man, you've got to be there."

"Oh, I'll turn up," said Andrews with a smile.

They shook hands nervously.

"Say, Andy," said Chrisfield, still holding on to Andrews's hand,
"Ah went A.W.O.L. 'cause a sergeant...God damn it; it's weighin'
on ma mind awful these days.... There's a sergeant that knows."

"What you mean?"

"Ah told ye about Anderson...Ah know you ain't tole anybody,
Andy." Chrisfield dropped Andrews's hand and looked at him in the
face with an unexpected sideways glance. Then he went on through
clenched teeth: "Ah swear to Gawd Ah ain't tole another livin'
soul.... An' the sergeant in Company D knows."

"For God's sake, Chris, don't lose your nerve like that."

"Ah ain't lost ma nerve. Ah tell you that guy knows."

Chrisfield's voice rose, suddenly shrill.

"Look, Chris, we can't stand talking out here in the street like
this. It isn't safe."

"But mebbe you'll be able to tell me what to do. You think, Andy.
Mebbe, tomorrow, you'll have thought up somethin' we can do...So
long."

Chrisfield walked away hurriedly. Andrews looked after him a
moment, and then went in through the court to the house where his
room was.

At the foot of the stairs an old woman's voice startled him.

"Mais, Monsieur Andre, que vous avez l'air etrange; how funny you
look dressed like that."

The concierge was smiling at him from her cubbyhole beside the
stairs. She sat knitting with a black shawl round her head, a tiny
old woman with a hooked bird-like nose and eyes sunk in
depressions full of little wrinkles, like a monkey's eyes.

"Yes, at the town where I was demobilized, I couldn't get anything
else," stammered Andrews.

"Oh, you're demobilized, are you? That's why you've been away so
long. Monsieur Valters said he didn't know where you were.... It's
better that way, isn't it?"

"Yes," said Andrews, starting up the stairs.

"Monsieur Valters is in now," went on the old woman, talking after
him. "And you've got in just in time for the first of May."

"Oh, yes, the strike," said Andrews, stopping half-way up the
flight.

"It'll be dreadful," said the old woman. "I hope you won't go out.
Young folks are so likely to get into trouble...Oh, but all your
friends have been worried about your being away so long."

"Have they?'" said Andrews. He continued up the stairs.

"Au revoir, Monsieur."

"Au revoir, Madame."



                              III

"No, nothing can make me go back now. It's no use talking about
it."

"But you're crazy, man. You're crazy. One man alone can't buck the
system like that, can he, Henslowe?"

Walters was talking earnestly, leaning across the table beside the
lamp. Henslowe, who sat very stiff on the edge of a chair, nodded
with compressed lips. Andrews lay at full length on the bed, out
of the circle of light.

"Honestly, Andy," said Henslowe with tears in his voice, "I think
you'd better do what Walters says. It's no use being heroic about
it."

"I'm not being heroic, Henny," cried Andrews, sitting up on the
bed. He drew his feet under him, tailor fashion, and went on
talking very quietly. "Look.. It's a purely personal matter. I've
got to a point where I don't give a damn what happens to me. I
don't care if I'm shot, or if I live to be eighty...I'm sick of
being ordered round. One more order shouted at my head is not
worth living to be eighty...to me. That's all. For God's sake
let's talk about something else."

"But how many orders have you had shouted at your head since you
got in this School Detachment? Not one. You can put through your
discharge application probably...." Walters got to his feet,
letting the chair crash to the floor behind him. He stopped to
pick it up. "Look here; here's my proposition," he went on. "I
don't think you are marked A.W.O.L. in the School office. Things
are so damn badly run there. You can turn up and say
you've been sick and draw your back pay. And nobody'll say a
thing. Or else I'll put it right up to the guy who's top sergeant.
He's a good friend of mine. We can fix it up on the records some
way. But for God's sake don't ruin your whole life on account of a
little stubbornness, and some damn fool anarchistic ideas or other
a feller like you ought to have had more sense than to pick
up...."

"He's right, Andy," said Henslowe in a low voice.

"Please don't talk any more about it. You've told me all that
before," said Andrews sharply. He threw himself back on the bed
and rolled over towards the wall.

They were silent a long time. A sound of voices and footsteps
drifted up from the courtyard.

"But, look here, Andy," said Henslowe nervously stroking his
moustache. "You care much more about your work than any abstract
idea of asserting your right of individual liberty. Even if you
don't get caught.... I think the chances of getting caught are
mighty slim if you use your head.... But even if you don't, you
haven't enough money to live for long over here, you haven't...."

"Don't you think I've thought of all that? I'm not crazy, you
know. I've figured up the balance perfectly sanely. The only thing
is, you fellows can't understand. Have you ever been in a labor
battalion? Have you ever had a man you'd been chatting with five
minutes before deliberately knock you down? Good God, you don't
know what you are talking about, you two.... I've got to be free,
now. I don't care at what cost. Being free's the only thing that
matters."

Andrews lay on his back talking towards the ceiling.

Henslowe was on his feet, striding nervously about the room.

"As if anyone was ever free," he muttered.

"All right, quibble, quibble. You can argue anything away if you
want to. Of course, cowardice is the best policy, necessary for
survival. The man who's got most will to live is the most
cowardly...go on." Andrews's voice was shrill and excited,
breaking occasionally like a half-grown boy's voice.

"Andy, what on earth's got hold of you?... God, I hate to go away
this way," added Henslowe after a pause.

"I'll pull through all right, Henny. I'll probably come to see you
in Syria, disguised as an Arab sheik." Andrews laughed excitedly.

"If I thought I'd do any good, I'd stay.... But there's nothing I
can do. Everybody's got to settle their own affairs, in their own
damn fool way. So long, Walters."

Walters and Henslowe shook hands absently.

Henslowe came over to the bed and held out his hand to Andrews.

"Look, old man, you will be as careful as you can, won't you? And
write me care American Red Cross, Jerusalem. I'll be damned
anxious, honestly."

"Don't you worry, we'll go travelling together yet," said Andrews,
sitting up and taking Henslowe's hand.

They heard Henslowe's steps fade down the stairs and then ring for
a moment on the pavings of the courtyard.

Walters moved his chair over beside Andrews's bed.

"Now, look, let's have a man-to-man talk, Andrews. Even if you
want to ruin your life, you haven't a right to. There's your
family, and haven't you any patriotism?... Remember, there is such
a thing as duty in the world."

Andrews sat up and said in a low, furious voice, pausing between
each word:

"I can't explain it.... But I shall never put a uniform on
again.... So for Christ's sake shut up."

"All right, do what you goddam please; I'm through with you."

Walters suddenly flashed into a rage. He began undressing
silently. Andrews lay a long while flat on his back in the bed,
staring at the ceiling, then he too undressed, put the light out,
and got into bed.



The rue des Petits-Jardins was a short street in a district of
warehouses. A grey, windowless wall shut out the light along all
of one side. Opposite was a cluster of three old houses leaning
together as if the outer ones were trying to support the beetling
mansard roof of the center house. Behind them rose a huge building
with rows and rows of black windows. When Andrews stopped to look
about him, he found the street completely deserted. The ominous
stillness that had brooded over the city during all the walk from
his room near the Pantheon seemed here to culminate in sheer
desolation. In the silence he could hear the light padding noise
made by the feet of a dog that trotted across the end of the
street. The house with the mansard roof was number eight. The
front of the lower storey had once been painted in chocolate-
color, across the top of which was still decipherable the sign:
"Charbon, Bois. Lhomond." On the grimed window beside the door,
was painted in white: "Debit de Boissons."

Andrews pushed on the door, which opened easily. Somewhere in the
interior a bell jangled, startlingly loud after the silence of the
street. On the wall opposite the door was a speckled mirror with a
crack in it, the shape of a star, and under it a bench with three
marble-top tables. The zinc bar filled up the third wall. In the
fourth was a glass door pasted up with newspapers. Andrews walked
over to the bar. The jangling of the bell faded to silence. He
waited, a curious uneasiness gradually taking possession of him.
Anyways, he thought, he was wasting his time; he ought to be doing
something to arrange his future. He walked over to the street door.
The bell jangled again when he opened it. At the same moment a man
came out through the door the newspapers were pasted over. He was
a stout man in a dirty white shirt stained to a brownish color
round the armpits and caught in very tightly at the waist by the
broad elastic belt that held up his yellow corduroy trousers. His
face was flabby, of a greenish color; black eyes looked at Andrews
fixedly through barely open lids, so that they seemed long slits
above the cheekbones.

"That's the Chink," thought Andrews.

"Well," said the man, taking his place behind the bar with his
legs far apart.

"A beer, please," said Andrews.

"There isn't any."

"A glass of wine then."

The man nodded his head, and keeping his eyes fastened on Andrews
all the while, strode out of the door again.

A moment later, Chrisfield came out, with rumpled hair, yawning,
rubbing an eye with the knuckles of one fist.

"Lawsie, Ah juss woke up, Andy. Come along in back."

Andrews followed him through a small room with tables and benches,
down a corridor where the reek of ammonia bit into his eyes, and
up a staircase littered with dirt and garbage. Chrisfield opened a
door directly on the stairs, and they stumbled into a large room
with a window that gave on the court. Chrisfield closed the door
carefully, and turned to Andrews with a smile.

"Ah was right smart 'askeered ye wouldn't find it, Andy."

"So this is where you live?"

"Um hum, a bunch of us lives here."

A wide bed without coverings, where a man in olive-drab slept
rolled in a blanket, was the only furniture of the room.

"Three of us sleeps in that bed," said Chrisfield.

"Who's that?" cried the man in the bed, sitting up suddenly.

"All right, Al, he's a buddy o' mine," said Chrisfield. "He's
taken off his uniform."

"Jesus, you got guts," said the man in the bed.

Andrews looked at him sharply. A piece of towelling, splotched
here and there with dried blood, was wrapped round his head, and a
hand, swathed in bandages, was drawn up to his body. The man's
mouth took on a twisted expression of pain as he let his head
gradually down to the bed again.

"Gosh, what did you do to yourself?" cried Andrews.

"I tried to hop a freight at Marseilles."

"Needs practice to do that sort o' thing," said Chrisfield, who
sat on the bed, pulling his shoes off. "Ah'm go-in' to git back to
bed, Andy. Ah'm juss dead tired. Ah chucked cabbages all night at
the market. They give ye a job there without askin' no questions."

"Have a cigarette." Andrews sat down on the foot of the bed and
threw a cigarette towards Chrisfield. "Have one?" he asked Al.

"No. I couldn't smoke. I'm almost crazy with this hand. One of the
wheels went over it.... I cut what was left of the little finger
off with a razor." Andrews could see the sweat rolling down his
cheek as he spoke.

"Christ, that poor beggar's been havin' a time, Andy. We was
'askeert to get a doctor, and we all didn't know what to do."

"I got some pure alcohol an' washed it in that. It's not infected.
I guess it'll be all right."

"Where are you from, Al?" asked Andrews.

"'Frisco. Oh, I'm goin' to try to sleep. I haven't slept a wink
for four nights."

"Why don't you get some dope?"

"Oh, we all ain't had a cent to spare for anythin', Andy."

"Oh, if we had kale we could live like kings--not," said Al in the
middle of a nervous little giggle.

"Look, Chris," said Andrews, "I'll halve with you. I've got five
hundred francs."

"Jesus Gawd, man, don't kid about anything like that."

"Here's two hundred and fifty.... It's not so much as it sounds."

Andrews handed him five fifty-franc notes.

"Say, how did you come to bust loose?" said Al, turning his head
towards Andrews.

"I got away from a labor battalion one night. That's all."

"Tell me about it, buddy. I don't feel my hand so much when I'm
talking to somebody.... I'd be home now if it wasn't for a gin
mill in Alsace. Say, don't ye think that big headgear they sport
up there is awful good looking? Got my goat every time I saw
one.... I was comin' back from leave at Grenoble, an' I went
through Strasburg. Some town. My outfit was in Coblenz. That's
where I met up with Chris here. Anyway, we was raisin' hell round
Strasburg, an' I went into a gin mill down a flight of steps. Gee,
everything in that town's plumb picturesque, just like a kid I
used to know at home whose folks were Eytalian used to talk about
when he said how he wanted to come overseas. Well, I met up with a
girl down there, who said she'd just come down to a place like
that to look for her brother who was in the foreign legion."

Andrews and Chrisfield laughed.

"What you laughin' at?" went on Al in an eager taut voice. "Honest
to Gawd. I'm goin' to marry her if I ever (fet out of this. She's
the best little girl I ever met up with. She was waitress in a
restaurant, an' when she was off duty she used to wear that there
Alsatian costume.... Hell, I just stayed on. Every day, I thought
I'd go away the next day.... Anyway, the war was over. I warn't a
damn bit of use.... Hasn't a fellow got any rights at all? Then
the M.P.'s started cleanin' up Strasburg after A.W.O.L.'s, an' I
beat it out of there, an' Christ, it don't look as if I'd ever be
able to get back."

"Say, Andy," said Chrisfield, suddenly, "let's go down after some
booze."

"All right."

"Say, Al, do you want me to get you anything at the drug store?"

"No. I won't do anythin' but lay low and bathe it with alcohol now
and then, against infection. Anyways, it's the first of May.
You'll be crazy to go out. You might get pulled. They say there's
riots going on."

"Gosh, I forgot it was the first of May," cried Andrews. "They're
running a general strike to protest against the war with Russia
and...."

"A guy told me," interrupted Al, in a shrill voice, "there might
be a revolution."

"Come along, Andy," said Chris from the door.

On the stairs Andrews felt Chrisfield's hand squeezing his arm
hard.

"Say, Andy," Chris put his lips close to Andrews's ear and spoke
in a rasping whisper. "You're the only one that knows...you know
what. You an' that sergeant. Doan you say anythin' so that the
guys here kin ketch on, d'ye hear?"

"All right, Chris, I won't, but man alive, you oughtn't to lose
your nerve about it. You aren't the only one who ever shot an..."

"Shut yer face, d'ye hear?" muttered Chrisfield savagely.

They went down the stairs in silence. In the room next, to the bar
they found the Chink reading a newspaper.

"Is he French?" whispered Andrews.

"Ah doan know what he is. He ain't a white man, Ah'll wager that,"
said Chris, "but he's square."

"D'you know anything about what's going on?" asked Andrews in
French, going up to the Chink.

"Where?" The Chink got up, flashing a glance at Andrews out of the
corners of his slit-like eyes.

"Outside, in the streets, in Paris, anywhere where people are out
in the open and can do things. What do you think about the
revolution?"

The Chink shrugged his shoulders.

"Anything's possible," he said.

"D'you think they really can overthrow the army and the government
in one day, like that?"

"Who?" broke in Chrisfield.

"Why, the people, Chris, the ordinary people like you and me, who
are tired of being ordered round, who are tired of being trampled
down by other people just like them, who've had the luck to get in
right with the system."

"D'you know what I'll do when the revolution comes?" broke in the
Chink with sudden intensity, slapping himself on the chest with
one hand. "I'll go straight to one of those jewelry stores, rue
Royale, and fill my pockets and come home with my hands full of
diamonds."

"What good'll that do you?"

"What good? I'll bury them back there in the court and wait. I'll
need them in the end. D'you know what it'll mean, your revolution?
Another system! When there's a system there are always men to be
bought with diamonds. That's what the world's like."

"But they won't be worth anything. It'll only be work that is
worth anything."

"We'll see," said the Chink.

"D'you think it could happen, Andy, that there'd be a revolution,
an' there wouldn't be any more armies, an' we'd be able to go
round like we are civilians? Ah doan think so. Fellers like us
ain't got it in 'em to buck the system, Andy."

"Many a system's gone down before; it will happen again."

"They're fighting the Garde Republicaine now before the Gare de
l'Est," said the Chink in an expressionless voice. "What do you
want down here? You'd better stay in the back. You never know what
the police may put over on us."

"Give us two bottles of vin blank, Chink," said Chrisfield.

"When'll you pay?"

"Right now. This guy's given me fifty francs."

"Rich, are you?" said the Chink with hatred in his voice, turning
to Andrews. "Won't last long at that rate. Wait here."

He strode into the bar, closing the door carefully after him. A
sudden jangling of the bell was followed by a sound of loud voices
and stamping feet. Andrews and Chrisfield tiptoed into the dark
corridor, where they stood a long time, waiting, breathing the
foul air that stung their nostrils with the stench of plaster-damp
and rotting wine. At last the Chink came back with three bottles
of wine.

"Well, you're right," he said to Andrews. "They are putting up
barricades on the Avenue Magenta."

On the stairs they met a girl sweeping. She had untidy hair that
straggled out from under a blue handkerchief tied under her chin,
and a pretty-colored fleshy face. Chrisfield caught her up to him
and kissed her, as he passed.

"We all calls her the dawg-faced girl," he said to Andrews in
explanation. "She does our work. Ah like to had a fight with
Slippery over her yisterday.... Didn't Ah, Slippery?"

When he followed Chrisfield into the room, Andrews saw a man
sitting on the window ledge smoking. He was dressed as a second
lieutenant, his puttees were brilliantly polished, and he smoked
through a long, amber cigarette-holder. His pink nails were
carefully manicured.

"This is Slippery, Andy," said Chrisfield. "This guy's an ole
buddy o' mine. We was bunkies together a hell of a time, wasn't
we, Andy?"

"You bet we were."

"So you've taken your uniform off, have you? Mighty foolish," said
Slippery. "Suppose they nab you?"

"It's all up now anyway. I don't intend to get nabbed," said
Andrews.

"We got booze," said Chrisfield.

Slippery had taken dice from his pocket and was throwing them
meditatively on the floor between his feet, snapping his fingers
with each throw.

"I'll shoot you one of them bottles, Chris," he said.

Andrews walked over to the bed. Al was stirring uneasily, his face
flushed and his mouth twitching.

"Hello," he said. "What's the news?"

"They say they're putting up barricades near the Gare de l'Est. It
may be something."

"God, I hope so. God, I wish they'd do everything here like they
did in Russia; then we'd be free. We couldn't go back to the
States for a while, but there wouldn't be no M.P.'s to hunt us
like we were criminals.... I'm going to sit up a while and talk."
Al giggled hysterically for a moment.

"Have a swig of wine?" asked Andrews.

"Sure, it may set me up a bit; thanks." He drank greedily from the
bottle, spilling a little over his chin.

"Say, is your face badly cut up, Al?"

"No, it's just scotched, skin's off; looks like beefsteak, I
reckon.... Ever been to Strasburg?"

"No."

"Man, that's the town. And the girls in that costume.... Whee!"

"Say, you're from San Francisco, aren't you?"

"Sure."

"Well, I wonder if you knew a fellow I knew at training camp, a
kid named Fuselli from 'Frisco?"

"Knew him! Jesus, man, he's the best friend I've got.... Ye don't
know where he is now, do you?"

"I saw him here in Paris two months ago."

"Well, I'll be damned.... God, that's great!" Al's voice was
staccato from excitement. "So you knew Dan at training camp? The
last letter from him was 'bout a year ago. Dan'd just got to be
corporal. He's a damn clever kid, Dan is, an' ambitious too, one
of the guys always makes good.... Gawd, I'd hate to see him this
way. D'you know, we used to see a hell of a lot of each other in
'Frisco, an' he always used to tell me how he'd make good before I
did. He was goddam right, too. Said I was too soft about girls....
Did ye know him real well?"

"Yes. I even remember that he used to tell me about a fellow he
knew who was called Al.... He used to tell me about how you two
used to go down to the harbor and watch the big liners come in at
night, all aflare with lights through the Golden Gate. And he used
to tell you he'd go over to Europe in one, when he'd made his
pile."

"That's why Strasburg made me think of him," broke in Al,
tremendously excited. "'Cause it was so picturesque like.... But
honest, I've tried hard to make good in this army. I've done
everything a feller could. An' all I did was to get into a cushy
job in the regimental office.... But Dan, Gawd, he may even be an
officer by this time."

"No, he's not that," said Andrews. "Look here, you ought to keep
quiet with that hand of yours."

"Damn my hand. Oh, it'll heal all right if I forget about it. You
see, my foot slipped when they shunted a car I was just climbing
into, an'...I guess I ought to be glad I wasn't killed. But, gee,
when I think that if I hadn't been a fool about that girl I might
have been home by now...."

"The Chink says they're putting up barricades on the Avenue
Magenta."

"That means business, kid!"

"Business nothin'," shouted Slippery from where he and Chrisfield
leaned over the dice on the tile floor in front of the window.
"One tank an' a few husky Senegalese'll make your goddam
socialists run so fast they won't stop till they get to Dijon....
You guys ought to have more sense." Slippery got to his feet and
came over to the bed, jingling the dice in his hand. "It'll take
more'n a handful o' socialists paid by the Boches to break the
army. If it could be broke, don't ye think people would have done
it long ago?"

"Shut up a minute. Ah thought Ah heard somethin'," said Chrisfield
suddenly, going to the window.

They held their breath. The bed creaked as Al stirred uneasily in
it.

"No, warn't anythin'; Ah'd thought Ah'd heard people singin'."

"The Internationale," cried Al.

"Shut up," said Chrisfield in a low gruff voice.

Through the silence of the room they heard steps on the stairs.

"All right, it's only Smiddy," said Slippery, and he threw the
dice down on the tiles again.

The door opened slowly to let in a tall, stoop-shouldered man with
a long face and long teeth.

"Who's the frawg?" he asked in a startled way, with one hand on
the door knob.

"All right, Smiddy; it ain't a frawg; it's a guy Chris knows. He's
taken his uniform off."

"'Lo, buddy," said Smiddy, shaking Andrews's hand. "Gawd, you look
like a frawg."

"That's good," said Andrews.

"There's hell to pay," broke out Smiddy breathlessly. "You know
Gus Evans and the little black-haired guy goes 'round with him?
They been picked up. I seen 'em myself with some M. P.'s at Place
de la Bastille. An' a guy I talked to under the bridge where I
slep' last night said a guy'd tole him they were goin' to clean
the A. W. O. L.'s out o' Paris if they had to search through every
house in the place."

"If they come here they'll git somethin' they ain't lookin' for,"
muttered Chrisfield.

"I'm goin' down to Nice; getting too hot around here," said
Slippery. "I've got travel orders in my pocket now."

"How did you get "em?"

"Easy as pie," said Slippery, lighting a cigarette and puffing
affectedly towards the ceiling. "I met up with a guy, a second
loot, in the Knickerbocker Bar. We gets drunk together, an' goes
on a party with two girls I know. In the morning I get up bright
an' early, and now I've got five thousand francs, a leave slip and
a silver cigarette case, an' Lootenant J. B. Franklin's runnin'
around sayin' how he was robbed by a Paris whore, or more likely
keepin' damn quiet about it. That's my system."

"But, gosh darn it, I don't see how you can go around with a guy
an' drink with him, an' then rob him," cried Al from the bed.

"No different from cleaning a guy up at craps."

"Well?"

"An' suppose that feller knew that I was only a bloody private.
Don't you think he'd have turned me over to the M. P.'s like
winkin'?"

"No, I don't think so," said Al. "They're juss like you an me,
skeered to death they'll get in wrong, but they won't light on a
feller unless they have to."

"That's a goddam lie," cried Chrisfield. "They like ridin' yer. A
doughboy's less'n a dawg to 'em. Ah'd shoot anyone of 'em lake
Ah'd shoot a nigger."

Andrews was watching Chrisfield's face; it suddenly flushed red.
He was silent abruptly. His eyes met Andrews's eyes with a flash
of fear.

"They're all sorts of officers, like they're all sorts of us," Al
was insisting.

"But you damn fools, quit arguing," cried Smiddy. "What the hell
are we goin' to do? It ain't safe here no more, that's how I look
at it."

They were silent.

At last Chrisfield said:

"What you goin' to do, Andy?"

"I hardly know. I think I'll go out to St. Germain to see a boy I
know there who works on a farm to see if it's safe to take a job
there. I won't stay in Paris. Then there's a girl here I want to
look up. I must see her." Andrews broke off suddenly, and started
walking back and forth across the end of the room.

"You'd better be damn careful; they'll probably shoot you if they
catch you," said Slippery.

Andrews shrugged his shoulders.

"Well, I'd rather be shot than go to Leavenworth for twenty years,
Gawd! I would," cried Al.

"How do you fellers eat here?" asked Slippery.

"We buy stuff an' the dawg-faced girl cooks it for us."

"Got anything for this noon?"

"I'll go see if I can buy some stuff," said Andrews. "It's safer
for me to go out than for you."

"All right, here's twenty francs," said Slippery, handing Andrews
a bill with an offhand gesture.

Chrisfield followed Andrews down the stairs. When they reached the
passage at the foot of the stairs, he put his hand on Andrews's
shoulder and whispered:

"Say, Andy, d'you think there's anything in that revolution
business? Ah hadn't never thought they could buck the system
thataway."

"They did in Russia."

"Then we'd be free, civilians, like we all was before the draft.
But that ain't possible, Andy; that ain't possible, Andy."

"We'll see," said Andrews, as, he opened the door to the bar.

He went up excitedly to the Chink, who sat behind the row of
bottles along the bar.

"Well, what's happening?"

"Where?"

"By the Gare de l'Est, where they were putting up barricades?"

"Barricades!" shouted a young man in a red sash who was drinking
at a table. "Why, they tore down some of the iron guards round the
trees, if you call that barricades. But they're cowards. Whenever
the cops charge they run. They're dirty cowards."

"D'you think anything's going to happen?"

"What can happen when you've got nothing but a bunch of dirty
cowards?"

"What d'you think about it?" said Andrews, turning to the Chink.

The Chink shook his head without answering. Andrews went out.

When he cams back he found Al and Chrisfield alone in their room.
Chrisfield was walking up and down, biting his finger nails. On
the wall opposite the window was a square of sunshine reflected
from the opposite wall of the Court.

"For God's sake beat it, Chris. I'm all right," Al was saying in a
weak, whining voice, his face twisted up by pain.

"What's the matter?" cried Andrews, putting down a large bundle.

"Slippery's seen a M. P. nosin' around in front of the gin mill."

"Good God!"

"They've beat it.... The trouble is Al's too sick.... Honest to
gawd, Ah'll stay with you, Al."

"No. If you know somewhere to go, beat it, Chris. I'll stay here
with Al and talk French to the M. P.'s if they come. We'll fool
'em somehow." Andrews felt suddenly amused and joyous.

"Honest to gawd, Andy, Ah'd stay if it warn't that that sergeant
knows," said Chrisfield in a jerky voice.

"Beat it, Chris. There may be no time to waste."

"So long, Andy." Chrisfield slipped out of the door.

"It's funny, Al," said Andrews, sitting on the edge of the bed and
unwrapping the package of food, "I'm not a damn bit scared any
more. I think I'm free of the army, Al.... How's your hand?"

"I dunno. Oh, how I wish I was in my old bunk at Coblenz. I warn't
made for buckin' against the world this way.... If we had old Dan
with us.... Funny that you know Dan.... He'd have a million ideas
for gettin' out of this fix. But I'm glad he's not here. He'd bawl
me out so, for not havin' made good. He's a powerful ambitious
kid, is Dan."

"But it's not the sort of thing a man can make good in, Al," said
Andrews slowly. They were silent. There was no sound in the
courtyard, only very far away the clatter of a patrol of cavalry
over cobblestones. The sky had become overcast and the room was
very dark. The mouldy plaster peeling off the walls had streaks of
green in it. The light from the courtyard had a greenish tinge
that made their faces look pale and dead, like the faces of men
that have long been shut up between damp prison walls.

"And Fuselli had a girl named Mabe," said Andrews.

"Oh, she married a guy in the Naval Reserve. They had a grand
wedding," said Al.



                             IV

"At last I've got to you!"

John Andrews had caught sight of Genevieve on a bench at the end
of the garden under an arbor of vines. Her hair flamed bright in a
splotch of sun as she got to her feet. She held out both hands to
him.

"How good-looking you are like that," she cried.

He was conscious only of her hands in his hands and of her pale-
brown eyes and of the bright sun-splotches and the green shadows
fluttering all about them.

"So you are out of prison," she said, "and demobilized. How
wonderful! Why didn't you write? I have been very uneasy about
you. How did you find me here?"

"Your mother said you were here."

"And how do you like it, my Poissac?"

She made a wide gesture with her hand. They stood silent a moment,
side by side, looking about them. In front of the arbor was a
parterre of rounded box-bushes edging beds where disorderly roses
hung in clusters of pink and purple and apricot-color. And beyond
it a brilliant emerald lawn full of daisies sloped down to an old
grey house with, at one end, a squat round tower that had an ex-
tinguisher-shaped roof. Beyond the house were tall, lush-green
poplars, through which glittered patches of silver-grey river and
of yellow sand banks. From somewhere came a drowsy scent of mown
grass.

"How brown you are!" she said again. "I thought I had lost you....
You might kiss me, Jean."

The muscles of his arms tightened about her shoulders. Her hair
flamed in his eyes. The wind that rustled through broad grape-
leaves made a flutter of dancing light and shadow about them.

"How hot you are with the sun!" she said. "I love the smell of the
sweat of your body. You must have run very hard, coming here."

"Do you remember one night in the spring we walked home from
Pelleas and Melisande? How I should have liked to have kissed you
then, like this!" Andrews's voice was strange, hoarse, as if he
spoke with difficulty.

"There is the chateau tres froid et tres profond," she said with a
little laugh.

"And your hair. 'Je les tiens dans les doits, je les tiens dans la
bouche.... Toute ta chevelure, toute ta chevelure, Melisande, est
tombee de la tour.... D'you remember?"

"How wonderful you are."

They sat side by side on the stone bench without touching each
other.

"It's silly," burst out Andrews excitedly. "We should have faith
in our own selves. We can't live a little rag of romance without
dragging in literature. We are drugged with literature so that we
can never live at all, of ourselves."

"Jean, how did you come down here? Have you been demobilized
long?"'

"I walked almost all the way from Paris. You see, I am very
dirty."

"How wonderful! But I'll be quiet. You must tell me everything
from the moment you left me in Chartres."

"I'll tell you about Chartres later," said Andrews gruffly. "It
has been superb, one of the biggest weeks in my life, walking all
day under the sun, with the road like a white ribbon in the sun
over the hills and along river banks, where there were yellow
irises blooming, and through woods full of blackbirds, and with
the dust in a little white cloud round my feet, and all the time
walking towards you, walking towards you."

"And la Reine de Saba, how is it coming?"

"I don't know. It's a long time since I thought of it.... You have
been here long?"

"Hardly a week. But what are you going to do?"

"I have a room overlooking the river in a house owned by a very
fat woman with a very red face and a tuft of hair on her chin...."

"Madame Boncour."

"Of course. You must know everybody.... It's so small."

"And you're going to stay here a long time?"

"Almost forever, and work, and talk to you; may I use your piano
now and then?"

"How wonderful!"

Genevieve Rod jumped to her feet. Then she stood looking at him,
leaning against one of the twisted stems of the vines, so that the
broad leaves fluttered about her face, A white cloud, bright as
silver, covered the sun, so that the hairy young leaves and the
wind-blown grass of the lawn took on a silvery sheen. Two white
butterflies fluttered for a second about the arbor.

"You must always dress like that," she said after a while.

Andrews laughed.

"A little cleaner, I hope," he said. "But there can't be much
change. I have no other clothes and ridiculously little money."

"Who cares for money?" cried Genevieve. Andrews fancied he
detected a slight affectation in her tone, but he drove the idea
from his mind immediately.

"I wonder if there is a farm round here where I could get work."

"But you couldn't do the work of a farm labourer," cried
Genevieve, laughing.

"You just watch me."

"It'll spoil your hands for the piano."

"I don't care about that; but all that's later, much later. Before
anything else I must finish a thing I am working on. There is a
theme that came to me when I was first in the army, when I was
washing windows at the training camp."

"How funny you are, Jean! Oh, it's lovely to have you about again.
But you're awfully solemn today. Perhaps it's because I made you
kiss me."

"But, Genevieve, it's not in one day that you can unbend a slave's
back, but with you, in this wonderful place.... Oh, I've never
seen such sappy richness of vegetation! And think of it, a week's
walking first across those grey rolling uplands, and then at Blois
down into the haze of richness of the Loire.... D'you know
Vendome? I came by a funny little town from Vendome to Blois. You
see, my feet.... And what wonderful cold baths I've had on the
sand banks of the Loire.... No, after a while the rhythm of legs
all being made the same length on drill fields, the hopeless caged
dullness will be buried deep in me by the gorgeousness of this
world of yours!"

He got to his feet and crushed a leaf softly between his fingers.

"You see, the little grapes are already forming.... Look up
there," she said as she brushed the leaves aside just above his
head. "These grapes here are the earliest; but I must show you my
domain, and my cousins and the hen yard and everything."

She took his hand and pulled him out of the arbor. They ran like
children, hand in hand, round the box-bordered paths.

"What I mean is this," he stammered, following her across the
lawn. "If I could once manage to express all that misery in music,
I could shove it far down into my memory. I should be free to live
my own existence, in the midst of this carnival of summer."

At the house she turned to him; "You see the very battered ladies
over the door," she said. "They are said to be by a pupil of Jean
Goujon."

"They fit wonderfully in the landscape, don't they? Did I ever
tell you about the sculptures in the hospital where I was when I
was wounded?"

"No, but I want you to look at the house now. See, that's the
tower; all that's left of the old building. I live there, and
right under the roof there's a haunted room I used to be terribly
afraid of. I'm still afraid of it.... You see this Henri Quatre
part of the house was just a fourth of the house as planned. This
lawn would have been the court. We dug up foundations where the
roses are. There are all sorts of traditions as to why the house
was never finished."

"You must tell me them."

"I shall later; but now you must come and meet my aunt and my
cousins."

"Please, not just now, Genevieve.... I don't feel like talking to
anyone except you. I have so much to talk to you about."

"But it's nearly lunch time, Jean. We can have all that after
lunch."

"No, I can't talk to anyone else now. I must go and clean myself
up a little anyway."

"Just as you like.... But you must come this afternoon and play to
us. Two or three people are coming to tea.... It would be very
sweet of you, if you'd play to us, Jean."

"But can't you understand? I can't see you with other people now."

"Just as you like," said Genevieve, flushing, her hand on the iron
latch of the door.

"Can't I come to see you tomorrow morning? Then I shall feel more
like meeting people, after talking to you a long while. You see,
I...." He paused, with his eyes on the ground. Then he burst out
in a low, passionate voice: "Oh, if I could only get it out of my
mind...those tramping feet, those voices shouting orders."

His hand trembled when he put it in Genevieve's hand. She looked
in his eyes calmly with her wide brown eyes.

"How strange you are today, Jean! Anyway, come back early
tomorrow."

She went in the door. He walked round the house, through the
carriage gate, and went off with long strides down the road along
the river that led under linden trees to the village.

Thoughts swarmed teasingly through his head, like wasps about a
rotting fruit. So at last he had seen Genevieve, and had held her
in his arms and kissed her. And that was all. His plans for the
future had never gone beyond that point. He hardly knew what he
had expected, but in all the sunny days of walking, in all the
furtive days in Paris, he had thought of nothing else. He would
see Genevieve and tell her all about himself; he would unroll his
life like a scroll before her eyes. Together they would piece
together the future. A sudden terror took possession of him. She
had failed him. Floods of denial seethed through his mind. It was
that he had expected so much; he had expected her to understand
him without explanation, instinctively. He had told her nothing.
He had not even told her he was a deserter. What was it that had
kept him from telling her? Puzzle as he would, he could not
formulate it. Only, far within him, the certainty lay like an icy
weight: she had failed him. He was alone. What a fool he had been
to build his whole life on a chance of sympathy? No. It was rather
this morbid playing at phrases that was at fault. He was like a
touchy old maid, thinking imaginary results. "Take life at its
face value," he kept telling himself. They loved each other
anyway, somehow; it did not matter how. And he was free to work.
Wasn't that enough?

But how could he wait until tomorrow to see her, to tell her
everything, to break down all the silly little barriers between
them, so that they might look directly into each other's lives?

The road turned inland from the river between garden walls at the
entrance to the village. Through half-open doors Andrews got
glimpses of neatly-cultivated kitchen-gardens and orchards where
silver-leaved boughs swayed against the sky. Then the road swerved
again into the village, crowded into a narrow paved street by the
white and cream-colored houses with green or grey shutters and
pale, red-tiled roofs. At the end, stained golden with lichen, the
mauve-grey tower of the church held up its bells against the sky
in a belfry of broad pointed arches. In front of the church
Andrews turned down a little lane towards the river again, to come
out in a moment on a quay shaded by skinny acacia trees. On the
corner house, a ramshackle house with roofs and gables projecting
in all directions, was a sign: "Rendezvous de la Marine." The room
he stepped into was so low, Andrews had to stoop under the heavy
brown beams as he crossed it. Stairs went up from a door behind a
worn billiard table in the corner. Mme. Boncour stood between
Andrews and the stairs. She was a flabby, elderly woman with round
eyes and a round, very red face and a curious smirk about the
lips.

"Monsieur payera un petit peu d'advance, n'est-ce pas, Monsieur?"

"All right," said Andrews, reaching for his pocketbook. "Shall I
pay you a week in advance?"

The woman smiled broadly.

"Si Monsieur desire.... It's that life is so dear nowadays. Poor
people like us can barely get along."

"I know that only too well," said Andrews.

"Monsieur est etranger...." began the woman in a wheedling tone,
when she had received the money.

"Yes. I was only demobilized a short time ago."

"Aha! Monsieur est demobilise. Monsieur remplira la petite feuille
pour la police, n'est-ce pas?"

The woman brought from behind her back a hand that held a narrow
printed slip.

"All right. I'll fill it out now," said Andrews, his heart
thumping.

Without thinking what he was doing, he put the paper on the edge
of the billiard table and wrote: "John Brown, aged 23. Chicago
Ill., Etats-Unis. Musician. Holder of passport No. 1,432,286."

"Merci, Monsieur. A bientot, Monsieur. Au revoir, Monsieur."

The woman's singing voice followed him up the rickety stairs to
his room. It was only when he had closed the door that he
remembered that he had put down for a passport number his army
number. "And why did I write John Brown as a name?" he asked
himself.

"John Brown's body lies a-mouldering in the grave,
 But his soul goes marching on.
 Glory, glory, hallelujah!
 But his soul goes marching on."

He heard the song so vividly that he thought for an instant
someone must be standing beside him singing it. He went to the
window and ran his hand through his hair. Outside the Loire
rambled in great loops towards the blue distance, silvery reach
upon silvery reach, with here and there the broad gleam of a sand
bank. Opposite were poplars and fields patched in various greens
rising to hills tufted with dense shadowy groves. On the bare
summit of the highest hill a windmill waved lazy arms against the
marbled sky.

Gradually John Andrews felt the silvery quiet settle about him. He
pulled a sausage and a piece of bread out of the pocket of his
coat, took a long swig of water from the pitcher on his washstand,
and settled himself at the table before the window in front of a
pile of ruled sheets of music paper. He nibbled the bread and the
sausage meditatively for a long while, then wrote "Arbeit und
Rhythmus" in a large careful hand at the top of the paper. After
that he looked out of the window without moving, watching the
plumed clouds sail like huge slow ships against the slate-blue
sky. Suddenly he scratched out what he had written and scrawled
above it: "The Body and Soul of John Brown." He got to his feet
and walked about the room with clenched hands.

"How curious that I should have written that name. How curious
that I should have written that name!" he said aloud.

He sat down at the table again and forgot everything in the music
that possessed him.



The next morning he walked out early along the river, trying to
occupy himself until it should be time to go to see Genevieve. The
memory of his first days in the army, spent washing windows at the
training camp, was very vivid in his mind. He saw himself again
standing naked in the middle of a wide, bare room, while the
recruiting sergeant measured and prodded him. And now he was a
deserter. Was there any sense to it all? Had his life led in any
particular direction, since he had been caught haphazard in the
treadmill, or was it all chance? A toad hopping across a road in
front of a steam roller.

He stood still, and looked about him. Beyond a clover field was
the river with its sand banks and its broad silver reaches. A boy
was wading far out in the river catching minnows with a net.
Andrews watched his quick movements as he jerked the net through
the water. And that boy, too, would be a soldier; the lithe body
would be thrown into a mould to be made the same as other bodies,
the quick movements would be standardized into the manual at arms,
the inquisitive, petulant mind would be battered into servility.
The stockade was built; not one of the sheep would escape. And
those that were not sheep? They were deserters; every rifle muzzle
held death for them; they would not live long. And yet other
nightmares had been thrown off the shoulders of men. Every man who
stood up courageously to die loosened the grip of the nightmare.

Andrews walked slowly along the road, kicking his feet into the
dust like a schoolboy. At a turning he threw himself down on the
grass under some locust trees. The heavy fragrance of their
flowers and the grumbling of the bees that hung drunkenly on the
white racemes made him feel very drowsy. A cart passed, pulled by
heavy white horses; an old man with his back curved like the top
of a sunflower stalk hobbled after, using the whip as a walking
stick. Andrews saw the old man's eyes turned on him suspiciously.
A faint pang of fright went through him; did the old man know he
was a deserter? The cart and the old man had already disappeared
round the bend in the road. Andrews lay a long while listening to
the jingle of the harness thin into the distance, leaving him
again to the sound of the drowsy bees among the locust blossoms.

When he sat up, he noticed that through a break in the hedge
beyond the slender black trunks of the locusts, he could see
rising above the trees the extinguisher-shaped roof of the tower
of Genevieve Rod's house. He remembered the day he had first seen
Genevieve, and the boyish awkwardness with which she poured tea.
Would he and Genevieve ever find a moment of real contact? All at
once a bitter thought came to him. "Or is it that she wants a tame
pianist as an ornament to a clever young woman's drawing room?" He
jumped to his feet and started walking fast towards the town
again. He would go to see her at once and settle all that forever.
The village clock had begun to strike; the clear notes vibrated
crisply across the fields: ten.

Walking back to the village he began to think of money. His room
was twenty francs a week. He had in his purse a hundred and
twenty-four francs. After fishing in all his pockets for silver,
he found three francs and a half more. A hundred and twenty-seven
francs fifty. If he could live on forty francs a week, he would
have three weeks in which to work on the "Body and Soul of John
Brown." Only three weeks; and then he must find work. In any case
he would write Henslowe to send him money if he had any; this was
no time for delicacy; everything depended on his having money. And
he swore to himself that he would work for three weeks, that he
would throw the idea that flamed within him into shape on paper,
whatever happened. He racked his brains to think of someone in
America he could write to for money, A ghastly sense of solitude
possessed him. And would Genevieve fail him too?

Genevieve was coming out by the front door of the house when he
reached the carriage gate beside the road.

She ran to meet him.

"Good morning. I was on my way to fetch you."

She seized his hand and pressed it hard.

"How sweet of you!"

"But, Jean, you're not coming from the village."

"I've been walking."

"How early you must get up!"

"You see, the sun rises just opposite my window, and shines in on
my bed. That makes me get up early."

She pushed him in the door ahead of her. They went through the
hall to a long high room that had a grand piano and many old high-
backed chairs, and in front of the French windows that opened on
the garden, a round table of black mahogany littered with books.
Two tall girls in muslin dresses stood beside the piano.

"These are my cousins.... Here he is at last. Monsieur Andrews, ma
cousine Berthe et ma cousine Jeanne. Now you've got to play to us;
we are bored to death with everything we know."

"All right.... But I have a great deal to talk to you about
later," said Andrews in a low voice.

Genevieve nodded understandingly.

"Why don't you play us La Reine de Saba, Jean?"

"Oh, do play that," twittered the cousins.

"If you don't mind, I'd rather play some Bach."

"There's a lot of Bach in that chest in the corner," cried
Genevieve. "It's ridiculous; everything in the house is jammed
with music."

They leaned over the chest together, so that Andrews felt her hair
brush against his cheek, and the smell of her hair in his
nostrils. The cousins remained by the piano.

"I must talk to you alone soon," whispered Andrews.

"All right," she said, her face reddening as she leaned over the
chest.

On top of the music was a revolver.

"Look out, it's loaded," she said, when he picked it up.

He looked at her inquiringly. "I have another in my room. You see
Mother and I are often alone here, and then, I like firearms.
Don't you?"

"I hate them," muttered Andrews.

"Here's tons of Bach."

"Fine.... Look, Genevieve," he said suddenly, "lend me that
revolver for a few days. I'll tell you why I want it later."

"Certainly. Be careful, because it's loaded," she said in an
offhand manner, walking over to the piano with two volumes under
each arm. Andrews closed the chest and followed her, suddenly
bubbling with gaiety. He opened a volume haphazard.

"To a friend to dissuade him from starting on a journey," he read.
"Oh, I used to know that."

He began to play, putting boisterous vigor into the tunes. In a
pianissimo passage he heard one cousin whisper to the other:
"Qu'il a l'air interessant."

"Farouche, n'est-ce pas? Genre revolutionnaire," answered the
other cousin, tittering. Then he noticed that Mme. Rod was smiling
at him. He got to his feet.

"Mais ne vous derangez pas," she said.

A man with white flannel trousers and tennis shoes and a man in
black with a pointed grey beard and amused grey eyes had come into
the room, followed by a stout woman in hat and veil, with long
white cotton gloves on her arms. Introductions were made.
Andrews's spirits began to ebb. All these people were making
strong the barrier between him and Genevieve. Whenever he looked
at her, some well-dressed person stepped in front of her with a
gesture of politeness. He felt caught in a ring of well-dressed
conventions that danced about him with grotesque gestures of
politeness. All through lunch he had a crazy desire to jump to his
feet and shout: "Look at me; I'm a deserter. I'm under the wheels
of your system. If your system doesn't succeed in killing me, it
will be that much weaker, it will have less strength to kill
others." There was talk about his demobilization, and his music,
and the Schola Cantorum. He felt he was being exhibited. "But they
don't know what they're exhibiting," he said to himself with a
certain bitter joy.

After lunch they went out into the grape arbor, where coffee was
brought. Andrews sat silent, not listening to the talk, which was
about Empire furniture and the new taxes, staring up into the
broad sun-splotched leaves of the grape vines, remembering how the
sun and shade had danced about Genevieve's hair when they had been
in the arbor alone the day before, turning it all to red flame.
Today she sat in shadow, and her hair was rusty and dull. Time
dragged by very slowly.

At last Genevieve got to her feet.

"You haven't seen my boat," she said to Andrews. "Let's go for a
row. I'll row you about."

Andrews jumped up eagerly.

"Make her be careful, Monsieur Andrews, she's dreadfully
imprudent,'" said Madame Rod.

"You were bored to death," said Genevieve, as they walked out on
the road.

"No, but those people all seemed to be building new walls between
you and me. God knows there are enough already."

She looked him sharply in the eyes a second, but said nothing.

They walked slowly through the sand of the river edge, till they
came to an old flat-bottomed boat painted green with an orange
stripe, drawn up among the reeds.

"It will probably sink; can you swim?" she asked, laughing.

Andrews smiled, and said in a stiff voice:

"I can swim. It was by swimming that I got out of the army."

"What do you mean?"

"When I deserted."

"When you deserted?"

Genevieve leaned over to pull on the boat. Their heads almost
touching, they pulled the boat down to the water's edge, then
pushed it half out on to the river.

"And if you are caught?"

"They might shoot me; I don't know. Still, as the war is over, it
would probably be life imprisonment, or at least twenty years."

"You can speak of it as coolly as that?"

"It is no new idea to my mind."

"What induced you to do such a thing?"

"I was not willing to submit any longer to the treadmill."

"Come let's go out on the river."

Genevieve stepped into the boat and caught up the oars.

"Now push her off, and don't fall in," she cried.

The boat glided out into the water. Genevieve began pulling on the
oars slowly and regularly. Andrews looked at her without speaking.

"When you're tired, I'll row," he said after a while.

Behind them the village, patched white and buff-color and russet
and pale red with stucco walls and steep, tiled roofs, rose in an
irregular pyramid to the church. Through the wide pointed arches
of the belfry they could see the bells hanging against the sky.
Below in the river the town was reflected complete, with a great
rift of steely blue across it where the wind ruffled the water.
The oars creaked rhythmically as Genevieve pulled on them.

"Remember, when you are tired," said Andrews again after a long
pause.

Genevieve spoke through clenched teeth:

"Of course, you have no patriotism."

"As you mean it, none."

They rounded the edge of a sand bank where the current ran hard.
Andrews put his hands beside her hands on the oars, and pushed
with her. The bow of the boat grounded in some reeds under
willows.

"We'll stay here," she said, pulling in the oars that flashed in
the sun as she jerked them, dripping silver, out of the water.

She clasped her hands round her knees and leaned over towards him.

"So that is why you want my revolver.... Tell me all about it,
from Chartres," she said, in a choked voice.

"You see, I was arrested at Chartres and sent to a labor
battalion, the equivalent for your army prison, without being able
to get word to my commanding officer in the School Detachment...."
He paused.

A bird was singing in the willow tree. The sun was under a cloud;
beyond the long pale green leaves that fluttered ever so slightly
in the wind, the sky was full of silvery and cream-colored clouds,
with here and there a patch the color of a robin's egg. Andrews
began laughing softly.

"But, Genevieve, how silly those words are, those pompous,
efficient words: detachment, battalion, commanding officer. It
would have all happened anyway. Things reached the breaking point;
that was all. I could not submit any longer to the discipline....
Oh, those long Roman words, what millstones they are about men's
necks! That was silly, too; I was quite willing to help in the
killing of Germans, I had no quarrel with, out of curiosity or
cowardice.... You see, it has taken me so long to find out how the
world is. There was no one to show me the way."

He paused as if expecting her to speak. The bird in the willow
tree was still singing.

Suddenly a dangling twig blew aside a little so that Andrews could
see him--a small grey bird, his throat all puffed out with song.

"It seems to me," he said very softly, "that human society has
been always that, and perhaps will be always that: organizations
growing and stifling individuals, and individuals revolting
hopelessly against them, and at last forming new societies to
crush the old societies and becoming slaves again in their
turn...."

"I thought you were a socialist," broke in Genevieve sharply, in a
voice that hurt him to the quick, he did not know why.

"A man told me at the labor battalion," began Andrews again, "that
they'd tortured a friend of his there once by making him swallow
lighted cigarettes; well, every order shouted at me, every new
humiliation before the authorities, was as great an agony to me.
Can't you understand?" His voice rose suddenly to a tone of
entreaty.

She nodded her head. They were silent. The willow leaves shivered
in a little wind. The bird had gone.

"But tell me about the swimming part of it. That sounds exciting."

"We were working unloading cement at Passy--cement to build the
stadium the army is presenting to the French, built by slave
labor, like the pyramids."

"Passy's where Balzac lived. Have you ever seen his house there?"

"There was a boy working with me, the Kid, 'le gosse,' it'd be in
French. Without him, I should never have done it. I was completely
crushed.... I suppose that he was drowned.... Anyway, we swam
under water as far as we could, and, as it was nearly dark, I
managed to get on a barge, where a funny anarchist family took
care of me. I've never heard of the Kid since. Then I bought these
clothes that amuse you so, Genevieve, and came back to Paris to
find you, mainly."

"I mean as much to you as that?" whispered Genevieve.

"In Paris, too. I tried to find a boy named Marcel, who worked on
a farm near St. Germain. I met him out there one day. I found he'd
gone to sea.... If it had not been that I had to see you, I should
have gone straight to Bordeaux or Marseilles. They aren't too
particular who they take as a seaman now."

"But in the army didn't you have enough of that dreadful life,
always thrown among uneducated people, always in dirty, foul-
smelling surroundings, you, a sensitive person, an artist? No
wonder you are almost crazy after years of that." Genevieve spoke
passionately, with her eyes fixed on his face.

"Oh, it wasn't that," said Andrews with despair in his voice. "I
rather like the people you call low. Anyway, the differences
between people are so slight...." His sentence trailed away. He
stopped speaking, sat stirring uneasily on the seat, afraid he
would cry out. He noticed the hard shape of the revolver against
his leg.

"But isn't there something you can do about it? You must have
friends," burst out Genevieve. "You were treated with horrible
injustice. You can get yourself reinstated and properly
demobilised. They'll see you are a person of intelligence. They
can't treat you as they would anybody."

"I must be, as you say, a little mad, Genevieve," said Andrews.

"But now that I, by pure accident, have made a gesture, feeble as
it is, towards human freedom, I can't feel that.... Oh, I suppose
I'm a fool.... But there you have me, just as I am, Genevieve."

He sat with his head drooping over his chest, his two hands
clasping the gunwales of the boat. After a long while Genevieve
said in a dry little voice:

"Well, we must go back now; it's time for tea."

Andrews looked up. There was a dragon fly poised on the top of a
reed, with silver wings and a long crimson body.

"Look just behind you, Genevieve."

"Oh, a dragon fly! What people was it that made them the symbol of
life? It wasn't the Egyptians. O, I've forgotten."

"I'll row," said Andrews.

The boat was hurried along by the current. In a very few minutes
they had pulled it up on the bank in front of the Rods' house.

"Come and have some tea," said Genevieve.

"No, I must work."

"You are doing something new, aren't you?"

Andrews nodded.

"What's its name?"

"The Soul and Body of John Brown."

"Who's John Brown?"

"He was a madman who wanted to free people. There's a song about
him."

"It is based on popular themes?"

"Not that I know of.... I only thought of the name yesterday. It
came to me by a very curious accident."

"You'll come tomorrow?"

"If you're not too busy."

"Let's see, the Boileaus are coming to lunch. There won't be
anybody at tea time. We can have tea together alone."

He took her hand and held it, awkward as a child with a new
playmate.

"All right, at about four. If there's nobody there, we'll play
music," he said.

She pulled her hand from him hurriedly, made a curious formal
gesture of farewell, and crossed the road to the gate without
looking back. There was one idea in his head, to get to his room
and lock the door and throw himself face down on the bed. The idea
amused some distant part of his mind. That had been what he had
always done when, as a child, the world had seemed too much for
him. He would run upstairs and lock the door and throw
himself face downward on the bed. "I wonder if I shall cry?" he
thought.

Madame Boncour was coming down the stairs as he went up. He backed
down and waited. When she got to the bottom, pouting a little, she
said:

"So you are a friend of Mme. Rod, Monsieur?"

"How did you know that?"

A dimple appeared near her mouth in either cheek.

"You know, in the country, one knows everything," she said.

"Au revoir," he said, starting up the stairs.

"Mais, Monsieur. You should have told me. If I had known I should
not have asked you to pay in advance. Oh, never. You must pardon
me, Monsieur."

"All right."

"Monsieur est Americain? You see I know a lot." Her puffy cheeks
shook when she giggled. "And Monsieur has known Mme. Rod et Mlle.
Rod a long time. An old friend. Monsieur is a musician."

"Yes. Bon soir." Andrews ran up the stairs.

"Au revoir, Monsieur." Her chanting voice followed him up the
stairs.

He slammed the door behind him and threw himself on the bed.

When Andrews awoke next morning, his first thought was how long he
had to wait that day to see Genevieve. Then he remembered their
talk of the day before. Was it worth while going to see her at
all, he asked himself. And very gradually he felt cold despair
taking hold of him. He felt for a moment that he was the only
living thing in a world of dead machines; the toad hopping across
the road in front of a steam roller. Suddenly he thought of
Jeanne. He remembered her grimy, overworked fingers lying in her
lap. He pictured her walking up and down in front of the Cafe de
Rohan one Wednesday night, waiting for him. In the place of
Genevieve, what would Jeanne have done? Yet people were always
alone, really; however much they loved each other, there could be
no real union. Those who rode in the great car could never feel as
the others felt; the toads hopping across the road. He felt no
rancour against Genevieve.

These thoughts slipped from him while he was drinking the coffee
and eating the dry bread that made his breakfast; and afterwards,
walking back and forth along the river bank, he felt his mind and
body becoming as if fluid, and supple, trembling, bent in the rush
of his music like a poplar tree bent in a wind. He sharpened a
pencil and went up to his room again.

The sky was cloudless that day. As he sat at his table the square
of blue through the window and the hills topped by their windmill
and the silver-blue of the river, were constantly in his eyes.
Sometimes he wrote notes down fast, thinking nothing, feeling
nothing, seeing nothing; other times he sat for long periods
staring at the sky and at the windmill vaguely happy, playing with
unexpected thoughts that came and vanished, as now and then a moth
fluttered in the window to blunder about the ceiling beams, and,
at last, to disappear without his knowing how.

When the clock struck twelve, he found he was very hungry. For two
days he had eaten nothing but bread, sausage and cheese. Finding
Madame Boncour behind the bar downstairs, polishing glasses, he
ordered dinner of her. She brought him a stew and a bottle of wine
at once, and stood over him watching him eat it, her arms akimbo
and the dimples showing in her huge red cheeks.

"Monsieur eats less than any young man I ever saw," she said.

"I'm working hard," said Andrews, flushing.

"But when you work you have to eat a great deal, a great deal."

"And if the money is short?" asked Andrews with a smile.

Something in the steely searching look that passed over her eyes
for a minute startled him.

"There are not many people here now, Monsieur, but you should see
it on a market day.... Monsieur will take some dessert?"

"Cheese and coffee."

"Nothing more? It's the season of strawberries."

"Nothing more, thank you."

When Madame Boncour came back with the cheese, she said:

"I had Americans here once, Monsieur. A pretty time I had with
them, too. They were deserters. They went away without paying,
with the gendarmes after them I hope they were caught and sent to
the front, those good-for-nothings."

"There are all sorts of Americans," said Andrews in a low voice.
He was angry with himself because his heart beat so.

"Well, I'm going for a little walk. Au revoir, Madame."

"Monsieur is going for a little walk. Amusez-vous bien, Monsieur.
Au revoir, Monsieur," Madame Boncour's singsong tones followed him
out.

A little before four Andrews knocked at the front door of the
Rods' house. He could hear Santo, the little black and tan,
barking inside. Madame Rod opened the door for him herself.

"Oh, here you are," she said. "Come and have some tea. Did the
work go well to-day?"

"And Genevieve?" stammered Andrews.

"She went out motoring with some friends. She left a note for you.
It's on the tea-table."

He found himself talking, making questions and answers, drinking
tea, putting cakes into his mouth, all through a white dead mist.
Genevieve's note said:

"Jean:--I'm thinking of ways and means. You must get away to a
neutral country. Why couldn't you have talked it over with me
first, before cutting off every chance of going back. I'll be in
tomorrow at the same time.

"Bien a vous.
                                                 G. R."

"Would it disturb you if I played the piano a few minutes, Madame
Rod?" Andrews found himself asking all at once.

"No, go ahead. We'll come in later and listen to you."

It was only as he left the room that he realized he had been
talking to the two cousins as well as to Madame Rod.

At the piano he forgot everything and regained his mood of vague
joyousness. He found paper and a pencil in his pocket, and played
the theme that had come to him while he had been washing windows
at the top: of a step-ladder at training camp arranging it,
modelling it, forgetting everything, absorbed in his rhythms and
cadences. When he stopped work it was nearly dark. Genevieve Rod,
a veil round her head, stood in the French window that led to the
garden.

"I heard you," she said. "Go on."

"I'm through. How was your motor ride?"

"I loved it. It's not often I get a chance to go motoring."

"Nor is it often I get a chance to talk to you alone," cried
Andrews bitterly.

"You seem to feel you have rights of ownership over me. I resent
it. No one has rights over me." She spoke as if it were not the
first time she had thought of the phrase.

He walked over and leaned against the window beside her.

"Has it made such a difference to you, Genevieve, finding out that
I am a deserter?"

"No, of course not," she said hastily.

"I think it has, Genevieve.... What do you want me to do? Do you
think I should give myself up? A man I knew in Paris has given
himself up, but he hadn't taken his uniform off. It seems that
makes a difference. He was a nice fellow. His name was Al, he was
from San Francisco. He had nerve, for he amputated his own little
finger when his hand was crushed by a freight car."

"Oh, no, no. Oh, this is so frightful. And you would have been a
great composer. I feel sure of it."

"Why, would have been? The stuff I'm doing now's better than any
of the dribbling things I've done before, I know that."

"Oh, yes, but you'll need to study, to get yourself known."

"If I can pull through six months, I'm safe. The army will have
gone. I don't believe they extradite deserters."

"Yes, but the shame of it, the danger of being found out all the
time."

"I am ashamed of many things in my life, Genevieve. I'm rather
proud of this."

"But can't you understand that other people haven't your notions
of individual liberty?"

"I must go, Genevieve."

"You must come in again soon."

"One of these days."

And he was out in the road in the windy twilight, with his music
papers crumpled in his hand. The sky was full of tempestuous
purple clouds; between them were spaces of clear claret-colored
light, and here and there a gleam of opal. There were a few drops
of rain in the wind that rustled the broad leaves of the lindens
and filled the wheat fields with waves like the sea, and made the
river very dark between rosy sand banks. It began to rain. Andrews
hurried home so as not to drench his only suit. Once in his room
he lit four candles and placed them at the corners of his table. A
little cold crimson light still filtered in through the rain from
the afterglow, giving the candles a ghostly glimmer. Then he lay
on his bed, and staring up at the flickering light on the ceiling,
tried to think.

"Well, you're alone now, John Andrews," he said aloud, after a
half-hour, and jumped jauntily to his feet. He stretched himself
and yawned. Outside the rain pattered loudly and steadily. "Let's
have a general accounting," he said to himself. "It'll be easily a
month before I hear from old Howe in America, and longer before I
hear from Henslowe, and already I've spent twenty francs on food.
Can't make it this way. Then, in real possessions, I have one
volume of Villon, a green book on counterpoint, a map of France
torn in two, and a moderately well-stocked mind."

He put the two books on the middle of the table before him, on top
of his disorderly bundle of music papers and notebooks. Then he
went on, piling his possessions there as he thought of them. Three
pencils, a fountain pen. Automatically he reached for his watch,
but he remembered he'd given it to Al to pawn in case he didn't
decide to give himself up, and needed money. A toothbrush. A
shaving set. A piece of soap. A hairbrush and a broken comb.
Anything else? He groped in the musette that hung on the foot of
the bed. A box of matches. A knife with one blade missing, and a
mashed cigarette. Amusement growing on him every minute, he
contemplated the pile. Then, in the drawer, he remembered, was a
clean shirt and two pairs of soiled socks. And that was all,
absolutely all. Nothing saleable there. Except Genevieve's
revolver. He pulled it out of his pocket. The candlelight flashed
on the bright nickel. No, he might need that; it was too valuable
to sell. He pointed it towards himself. Under the chin was said to
be the best place. He wondered if he would pull the trigger when
the barrel was pressed against his chin. No, when his money gave
out he'd sell the revolver. An expensive death for a starving man.
He sat on the edge of the bed and laughed.

Then he discovered he was very hungry. Two meals in one day;
shocking! He said to himself. Whistling joyfully, like a
schoolboy, he strode down the rickety stairs to order a meal of
Madame Boncour.

It was with a strange start that he noticed that the tune he was
whistling was:

"John Brown's body lies a-mouldering in the grave,
 But his soul goes marching on."



The lindens were in bloom. From a tree beside the house great
gusts of fragrance, heavy as incense, came in through the open
window. Andrews lay across the table with his eyes closed and his
cheek in a mass of ruled papers. He was very tired. The first
movement of the "Soul and Body of John Brown" was down on paper.
The village clock struck two. He got to his feet and stood a
moment looking absently out of the window. It was a sultry
afternoon of swollen clouds that hung low over the river. The
windmill on the hilltop opposite was motionless. He seemed to hear
Genevieve's voice the last time he had seen her, so long ago. "You
would have been a great composer." He walked over to the table and
turned over some sheets without looking at them. "Would have
been!" He shrugged his shoulders. So you couldn't be a great
composer and a deserter too in the year 1919. Probably Genevieve
was right. But he must have something to eat.

"But how late it is," expostulated Madame Boncour, when he asked
for lunch.

"I know it's very late. I have just finished a third of the work
I'm doing.

"And do you get paid a great deal, when that is finished?" asked
Madame Boncour, the dimples appearing in her broad cheeks.

"Some day, perhaps."

"You will be lonely now that the Rods have left."

"Have they left?"

"Didn't  you  know?  Didn't you go to say goodby? They've gone to
the seashore.... But I'll make you a little omelette."

"Thank you."

When Madame Boncour cams back with the omelette and fried
potatoes, she said to him in a mysterious voice:

"You didn't go to see the Rods as often these last weeks."

"No."

Madame Boncour stood staring at him, with her red arms folded
round her breasts, shaking her head.

When he got up to go upstairs again, she suddenly shouted:

"And when are you going to pay me? It's two weeks since you have
paid me."

"But, Madame Boncour, I told you I had no money. If you wait a day
or two, I'm sure to get some in the mail. It can't be more than a
day or two."

"I've heard that story before."

"I've even tried to get work at several farms round here."

Madame Boncour threw back her head and laughed, showing the
blackened teeth of her lower jaw.

"Look here," she said at length, "after this week, it's finished.
You either pay me, or...And I sleep very lightly, Monsieur."
Her voice took on suddenly its usual sleek singsong tone.

Andrews broke away and ran upstairs to his room.

"I must fly the coop tonight," he said to himself. But suppose
then letters came with money the next day. He writhed in
indecision all the afternoon.

That evening he took a long walk. In passing the Rods' house he
saw that the shutters were closed. It gave him a sort of relief to
know that Genevieve no longer lived near him. His solitude was
complete, now.

And why, instead of writing music that would have been worth while
if he hadn't been a deserter, he kept asking himself, hadn't he
tried long ago to act, to make a gesture, however feeble, however
forlorn, for other people's freedom? Half by accident he had
managed to free himself from the treadmill. Couldn't he have
helped others? If he only had his life to live over again. No; he
had not lived up to the name of John Brown.

It was dark when he got back to the village. He had decided to
wait one more day.

The next morning he started working on the second movement. The
lack of a piano made it very difficult to get ahead, yet he said
to himself that he should put down what he could, as it would be
long before he found leisure again.

One night he had blown out his candle and stood at the window
watching the glint of the moon on the river. He heard a soft heavy
step on the landing outside his room. A floorboard creaked, and
the key turned in the lock. The step was heard again on the
stairs. John Andrews laughed aloud. The window was only twenty
feet from the ground, and there was a trellis. He got into bed
contentedly. He must sleep well, for tomorrow night he would slip
out of the window and make for Bordeaux.

Another morning. A brisk wind blew, fluttering Andrews's papers as
he worked. Outside the river was streaked blue and silver and
slate-colored. The windmill's arms waved fast against the piled
clouds. The scent of the lindens came only intermittently on the
sharp wind. In spite of himself, the tune of "John Brown's Body"
had crept in among his ideas. Andrews sat with a pencil at his
lips, whistling softly, while in the back of his mind a vast
chorus seemed singing:

"John Brown's body lies a-mouldering in the grave,
 But his soul goes marching on.
 Glory, glory, hallelujah!
 But his soul goes marching on."

If one could only find freedom by marching for it, came the
thought.

All at once he became rigid, his hands clutched the table edge.

There was an American voice under his window:

"D'you think she's kiddin' us, Charley?"

Andrews was blinded, falling from a dizzy height. God, could
things repeat themselves like that? Would everything be repeated?
And he seemed to hear voices whisper in his ears: "One of you men
teach him how to salute."

He jumped to his feet and pulled open the drawer. It was empty.
The woman had taken the revolver. "It's all planned, then. She
knew," he said aloud in a low voice.

He became suddenly calm.

A man in a boat was passing down the river. The boat was painted
bright green; the man wore a curious jacket of a burnt-brown
color, and held a fishing pole.

Andrews sat in his chair again. The boat was out of sight now, but
there was the windmill turning, turning against the piled white
clouds.

There were steps on the stairs.

Two swallows, twittering, curved past the window, very near, so
that Andrews could make out the marking on their wings and the way
they folded their legs against their pale-grey bellies.
There was a knock.

"Come in," said Andrews firmly.

"I beg yer pardon," said a soldier with his hat, that had a band,
in his hand. "Are you the American?"

"Yes."

"Well, the woman down there said she thought your papers wasn't in
very good order." The man stammered with embarrassment.

Their eyes met.

"No, I'm a deserter," said Andrews.

The M. P. snatched for his whistle and blew it hard. There was an
answering whistle from outside the window.

"Get your stuff together."

"I have nothing."

"All right, walk downstairs slowly in front of me."

Outside the windmill was turning, turning, against the piled white
clouds of the sky.

Andrews turned his eyes towards the door. The M. P. closed the
door after them, and followed on his heels down the steps.

On John Andrews's writing table the brisk wind rustled among the
broad sheets of paper. First one sheet, then another, blew off the
table, until the floor was littered with them.












End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Three Soldiers, by John Dos Passos

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THREE SOLDIERS ***

This file should be named thsld10.txt or thsld10.zip
Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks get a new NUMBER, thsld11.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, thsld10a.txt

Etext transcribed by Eve Sobol, South Bend, IN, USA

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg eBooks is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our Web sites at:
http://gutenberg.net or
http://promo.net/pg

These Web sites include award-winning information about Project
Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).


Those of you who want to download any eBook before announcement
can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext03 or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext03

Or /etext02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any eBook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text
files per month:  1240 more eBooks in 2001 for a total of 4000+
We are already on our way to trying for 2000 more eBooks in 2002
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
will reach over half a trillion eBooks given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away 1 Trillion eBooks!
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

Here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated):

eBooks Year Month

    1  1971 July
   10  1991 January
  100  1994 January
 1000  1997 August
 1500  1998 October
 2000  1999 December
 2500  2000 December
 3000  2001 November
 4000  2001 October/November
 6000  2002 December*
 9000  2003 November*
10000  2004 January*


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people
and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.

We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
donate.

International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be made
deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are
ways.

Donations by check or money order may be sent to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109

Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment
method other than by check or money order.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
[Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fund-raising
requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
made and fund-raising will begin in the additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information online at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here? You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this eBook, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault. So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you. It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this eBook if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS EBOOK
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
eBook, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement. If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this eBook by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from. If you received this eBook on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM EBOOKS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBooks,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this eBook
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these eBooks, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works. Despite these efforts, the Project's eBooks and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects". Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other eBook medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this eBook from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this eBook within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from. If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy. If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS EBOOK IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS". NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE EBOOK OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this eBook,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the eBook,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this eBook electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     eBook or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this eBook in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The eBook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The eBook may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the eBook (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          eBook in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the eBook refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

[Portions of this eBook's header and trailer may be reprinted only
when distributed free of all fees.  Copyright (C) 2001, 2002 by
Michael S. Hart.  Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be
used in any sales of Project Gutenberg eBooks or other materials be
they hardware or software or any other related product without
express permission.]

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS*Ver.02/11/02*END*
